URL: https://www.healthline.com/health/adhd
Content length: 22883
Content:
ADHD (Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder): What Is It? HealthlineHealth ConditionsDiscoverPlanConnectSubscribeEverything You Need to Know About ADHDMedically reviewed by Jeffrey Ditzell, DO — Written by Traci Angel — Updated on November 1, 2023SymptomsTypesCausesADHD diagnosis and testingTreatmentADD vs. ADHDAdult ADHDADHD in childrenIs ADHD a learning disability?ADHD and depressionTips for copingOutlookAttention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is a mental health condition that can cause unusual levels of hyperactivity and impulsive behaviors.People with ADHD may have trouble focusing their attention on a single task or sitting still for long periods of time.Many people experience inattention and changes in energy levels. For a person with ADHD, this happens more often and to a greater extent compared with people who do not have the condition. It can have a significant effect on their studies, work, relationships, and home life.Both adults and children can have ADHD. It’s a diagnosis the American Psychiatric Association (APA) recognizes. Learn about types of ADHD and symptoms in both children and adults.ADHD symptomsA wide range of behaviors is associated with ADHD. Some of the more common ones include:having trouble focusing or concentrating on tasksbeing forgetful about completing tasksbeing easily distractedhaving difficulty sitting stillinterrupting people while they’re talkingSigns and symptoms can be specific to different aspects of ADHD, such as hyperactivity, impulsivity, or difficulty focusing.A person who is experiencing hyperactivity and impulsivity may:find it difficult to sit still or remain seated in classhave trouble playing or carrying out tasks quietlytalk excessivelyfind it hard to wait their turninterrupt others when they’re speaking, playing, or carrying out a taskSomeone who is having difficulty focusing might:make frequent mistakes or miss details when studying or workingfind it hard to maintain focus when listening, reading, or holding a conversationhave trouble organizing their daily taskslose items frequentlybe easily distracted by small things happening around themIf you or your child has ADHD, you may have some or all of these symptoms. The symptoms you have will depend on the type of ADHD you have. Explore a list of ADHD symptoms common in children.What is executive dysfunction?Executive dysfunction is a common symptom of ADHD and refers to difficulties in cognitive functions, such as paying attention, absorbing or remembering new information, ignoring distractions, and regulating emotions and behaviors.Types of ADHDTo make ADHD diagnoses more consistent, the APA has grouped the condition into three categories, or types. These types are predominantly inattentive, predominantly hyperactivity-impulsive, and a combination of both. Predominantly inattentiveAs the name suggests, people with this type of ADHD have extreme difficulty focusing, finishing tasks, and following instructions. Experts also think that many children with the inattentive type of ADHD may not receive a proper diagnosis because they don’t tend to disrupt the classroom. Research suggests this is more common among girls with ADHD.Predominantly hyperactive-impulsive typePeople with this type of ADHD primarily show hyperactive and impulsive behavior. This can include: fidgetinginterrupting people while they’re talkingnot being able to wait their turnAlthough inattention is less of a concern with this type of ADHD, people with predominantly hyperactive-impulsive ADHD may still find it difficult to focus on tasks.Combined hyperactive-impulsive and inattentive typeThis is the most common type of ADHD. People with this combined type of ADHD display both inattentive and hyperactive symptoms. These include an inability to pay attention, a tendency toward impulsiveness, and above-average levels of activity and energy.The type of ADHD you or your child has will determine the treatment method. The ADHD type you have can change over time, so your treatment may change, too. Learn more about the three types of ADHD.What causes ADHD?Despite how common ADHD is, doctors and researchers still are not sure what causes the condition. It’s believed to have neurological origins. Genetics may also play a role.Research suggests that a reduction in dopamine is a factor in ADHD. Dopamine is a chemical in the brain that helps move signals from one nerve to another. It plays a role in triggering emotional responses and movements. Other research suggests a structural difference in the brain. Findings indicate that people with ADHD have less gray matter volume. Gray matter includes the brain areas that help with:speechself-controldecision-makingmuscle controlResearchers are still studying potential causes of ADHD, such as smoking during pregnancy. Find out more about the potential causes and risk factors of ADHD.ADHD diagnosis and testingThere’s no single test that can tell if you or your child has ADHD. A 2017 study highlighted the benefits of a new test to diagnose adult ADHD, but many clinicians believe an ADHD diagnosis cannot be made based on one test. To make a diagnosis, a doctor will assess any symptoms you or your child has had over the previous 6 months. Your doctor will likely gather information from teachers or family members and may use checklists and rating scales to review symptoms. They’ll also do a physical exam to check for other health problems. Learn more about ADHD rating scales and what they can and cannot do.If you suspect that you or your child has ADHD, talk with a doctor about getting an evaluation. For your child, you can also talk with their school counselor. Schools regularly assess children for conditions that may be affecting their educational performance.For the assessment, provide your doctor or counselor with notes and observations about your or your child’s behavior. If they suspect ADHD, they may refer you or your child to an ADHD specialist. Depending on the diagnosis, they may also suggest making an appointment with a psychiatrist or neurologist.ADHD treatmentTreatment for ADHD typically includes behavioral therapies, medication, or both.Types of therapy include psychotherapy or talk therapy. With talk therapy, you or your child will discuss how ADHD affects your life and ways to help you manage it. Another therapy type is behavioral therapy. This therapy can help you or your child learn how to monitor and manage your behavior. Medication can also be very helpful when you’re living with ADHD. ADHD medications are designed to affect brain chemicals in a way that enables you to better manage your impulses and actions. Find out more about treatment options and behavioral interventions that can help ease ADHD symptoms.ADHD medicationThe two main types of medications used to treat ADHD are stimulants and nonstimulants.Central nervous system (CNS) stimulants are the most commonly prescribed ADHD medications. These drugs work by increasing the amount of the brain chemicals dopamine and norepinephrine. Examples of these drugs include methylphenidate (Ritalin) and amphetamine-based stimulants (Adderall).If stimulants do not work well or cause troublesome side effects for you or your child, your doctor may suggest a nonstimulant medication. Certain nonstimulant medications work by increasing brain levels of norepinephrine. These medications include atomoxetine (Strattera) and some antidepressants like bupropion (Wellbutrin).ADHD medications can have many benefits, as well as side effects. Learn more about medication options for adults with ADHD.Natural remedies for ADHDIn addition to — or instead of — medication, several remedies have been suggested to help improve ADHD symptoms.For starters, making lifestyle changes may help you or your child manage ADHD symptoms. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recommends the following:eating a nutritious, balanced dietgetting at least 60 minutes of physical activity per daygetting plenty of sleeplimiting daily screen time from phones, computers, and TVStudies have also shown that yoga, tai chi, and spending time outdoors can help calm overactive minds and may help ease ADHD symptoms. Mindfulness meditation is another option. Research from 2015 has suggested meditation might improve attention span in people with ADHD.Avoiding certain allergens and food additives are also potential ways to help reduce ADHD symptoms. Learn more about these and other nondrug approaches to addressing ADHD.ADD vs. ADHDYou may have heard the terms “ADD” and “ADHD” and wondered what the difference is between them. ADD, or attention deficit disorder, is an outdated term. It was previously used to describe people who have problems paying attention but are not hyperactive. The type of ADHD called “predominantly inattentive” is now used in place of ADD.ADHD is the current overarching name of the condition. The term ADHD became official in May 2013 when the APA released the “Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th Edition (DSM-5).”This manual is what doctors refer to when making diagnoses for mental health conditions. Get a better understanding of the difference between ADD and ADHD.Adult ADHDAccording to the Anxiety & Depression Association of America, more than 60 percent of children with ADHD still show symptoms as adults. For many people, hyperactivity symptoms often decrease with age, but inattentiveness and impulsivity may continue.That said, treatment is important. Untreated ADHD in adults can have a negative impact on many aspects of life. Symptoms such as trouble managing time, forgetfulness, and impatience can cause problems at work, home, and in all types of relationships. Find out more about the signs and symptoms of ADHD in adults and how they can impact your life.ADHD in childrenAccording to the CDC, around 8.8 percent of people ages 3 to 17 years in the United States have had a diagnosis of ADHD at some point. This includes 11.7 percent of males and 5.7 percent of females. Language mattersSex and gender exist on spectrums for adults and children. This article uses the terms “male” and “female” and “boy” and girl” to refer to a person’s sex at birth, but that may not align with the person’s gender identity. Your doctor can better help you understand how your specific circumstances will translate into diagnosis, symptoms, and treatment.For children, ADHD is generally associated with problems at school. Children with ADHD often have difficulties in a controlled classroom setting. Boys are more than twice as likely as girls to receive an ADHD diagnosis. This may be because boys tend to exhibit hallmark symptoms of hyperactivity. Although some girls with ADHD may have the classic symptoms of hyperactivity, many do not. In many cases, girls with ADHD may:daydream frequentlybe hyper-talkative rather than hyperactiveMany ADHD symptoms can be typical childhood behaviors, so it can be hard to know what’s ADHD-related and what’s not. Learn more about how to recognize ADHD in toddlers.Is ADHD a learning disability?While ADHD is a neurodevelopmental disorder, it’s not considered a learning disability. However, ADHD symptoms can make it harder for you to learn. Also, it’s possible for ADHD to occur in some people who also have learning disabilities. To help relieve any effect on children learning, teachers can map out individual guidelines for a student with ADHD. This may include allowing extra time for assignments and tests or developing a personal reward system. Although it’s not technically a learning disability, ADHD can have long-term effects. Learn more about the potential effects of ADHD on adults and children and resources that can help.Neurotypical vs. neurodivergentNeurotypical describes someone who processes information in ways that are typical within their culture and among their peers. On the other hand, neurodivergent describes people who process information in a different way. People with ADHD sometimes identify as neurodivergent, but ultimately it’s a personal decision.Coexisting conditionsPeople with ADHD sometimes have other mental health conditions, such as depression and anxiety. Some of these conditions result from the challenges of living with ADHD.AnxietyPeople with ADHD can find it hard to keep up with daily tasks, maintain relationships, and so on. This can increase the risk of anxiety.People with ADHD are also more likely to experience an anxiety disorder than those without ADHD, according to the CDC. Anxiety disorders include: separation anxiety, when you are afraid of being away from loved onessocial anxiety, which can make you afraid of going to school or other places where people socializegeneralized anxiety, when you’re afraid of bad things happening, of the future, and so onDepressionIf you or your child has ADHD, you’re more likely to have depression as well. In one study from 2020, around 50 percent of adolescents had major depression or an anxiety disorder compared with 35 percent of those who did not have ADHD. Other research suggests that up to 53.3 percent of adults with ADHD may also have depression.Though there can be added challenges in managing more than one condition, treatments are available for both conditions. In fact, the treatments often overlap. Talk therapy can help treat both conditions. Also, certain antidepressants, such as bupropion, can sometimes help ease ADHD symptoms.Of course, having ADHD does not guarantee you’ll have depression, but it’s important to know it’s a possibility. Find out more about the link between ADHD and depression.Conduct and behavior disordersBehavior and conduct problems are more common among children with ADHD than those without the condition. These disorders can arise when a person does not feel understood by those around them. Someone who does not feel understood may argue a lot, lose their temper, or purposely annoy others. These may be signs of oppositional defiant disorder.Some people find they cannot help breaking rules or behaving aggressively toward others, maybe fighting, bullying, or perhaps taking things that do not belong to them. This is called conduct disorder.Treatment is available for people who face these challenges. Experts recommend starting treatment early and making sure the treatment fits the needs of the person and their family.Learning disorderSome children with ADHD have a learning disorder that can make it additionally hard to carry out their study tasks. Examples include dyslexia, which makes reading difficult, or presents difficulties with numbers or writing.These challenges can make it hard for a child to cope at school. They can also worsen feelings of anxiety and depression. Getting help early is essential in trying to minimize the effect of these challenges.Tips for coping with ADHDIf you or your child has ADHD, a consistent structured schedule and regular expectations may be helpful. For adults, staying organized can be helpful. Here are some ways that can help with getting organized and maintaining it: making listskeeping a calendarsetting remindersFor children, it can be helpful to focus on writing down homework assignments and keeping everyday items like toys and backpacks in assigned spots.Learning more about ADHD in general can also help you learn how to manage it. Organizations like Children and Adults with Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder or the Attention Deficit Disorder Association provide management tips as well as the latest research.Your doctor can provide more guidance on ways to manage your ADHD symptoms. Here are some tips for helping your child with ADHD.OutlookFor children and adults, untreated ADHD can have a lasting effect on your life. It can affect school, work, and relationships. Treatment is important and can help lessen the effects of the condition. Many people with ADHD enjoy fulfilling and successful lives. Some even express appreciation for the benefits of the condition. If you think you or your child may have ADHD, an important first step is talking with a doctor or another healthcare professional as soon as possible. They can help determine if ADHD is a factor for you or your child. If you or your child receives a confirmed ADHD diagnosis, the doctor can also help you create a treatment plan to help you manage your symptoms and live well with ADHD.Read this article in Spanish.How we reviewed this article:SourcesHistoryHealthline has strict sourcing guidelines and relies on peer-reviewed studies, academic research institutions, and medical journals and associations. We only use quality, credible sources to ensure content accuracy and integrity. You can learn more about how we ensure our content is accurate and current by reading our editorial policy.About ADHD — overview. (n.d.).https://chadd.org/about-adhd/overview/Adult ADHD (attention deficit hyperactive disorder). (n.d.).https://adaa.org/understanding-anxiety/related-illnesses/other-related-conditions/adult-adhdAttention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). (2022).https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/fastats/adhd.htmAttention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. (2022).https://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/topics/attention-deficit-hyperactivity-disorder-adhdBonath B, et al. (2016). Regional gray matter volume differences between adolescents with ADHD and typically developing controls: Further evidence for anterior cingulate involvement.https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/1087054715619682Chou C-C, et al. (2017). Effects of an 8-week yoga program on sustained attention and discrimination function in children with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder.https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5237364/Gold MS, et al. (2014). Low dopamine function in attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder: Should genotyping signify early diagnosis in children?https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4074363/Herbert A, et al. (2017). Mind–body therapy for children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5447989/Katzman MA, et al. (2017). Adult ADHD and comorbid disorders: Clinical implications of a dimensional approach.https://bmcpsychiatry.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s12888-017-1463-3Modesto-Lowe V, et al. (2015). Does mindfulness meditation improve attention in attention deficit hyperactivity disorder?https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26740931/Other concerns and conditions with ADHD. (2022).https://www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/adhd/conditions.htmlPowell V., et al. (2020). What explains the link between childhood ADHD and adolescent depression? Investigating the role of peer relationships and academic attainment.https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s00787-019-01463-wTillmann S, et al. (2018). Mental health benefits of interactions with nature in children and teenagers: A systematic review.https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6161651/Ustun B, et al. (2017). The World Health Organization adult attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder self-reportscreening scale for DSM-5.https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jamapsychiatry/fullarticle/2616166What is ADHD? (2022).https://www.psychiatry.org/patients-families/adhd/what-is-adhdWhat is ADHD? (2022).https://www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/adhd/facts.htmlYoung S, et al. (2020). Females with ADHD: An expert consensus statement taking a lifespan approach providing guidance for the identification and treatment of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder in girls and women.https://bmcpsychiatry.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s12888-020-02707-9Share this articleMedically reviewed by Jeffrey Ditzell, DO — Written by Traci Angel — Updated on November 1, 2023related storiesCommon Signs of Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD)ADHD and ODD: What’s the Connection?What Are the 3 Types of ADHD?Debunking 5 Common Misconceptions About ADHDADHD by the Numbers: Facts, Statistics, and YouRead this nextCommon Signs of Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD)Symptoms of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) can vary and be difficult to recognize. Here are some signs to look for in children and…READ MOREADHD and ODD: What’s the Connection?Medically reviewed by Timothy J. Legg, PhD, PsyDADHD and ODD are two very different conditions, but they can occur together. Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder affects impulse control and…READ MOREWhat Are the 3 Types of ADHD?There are three types of ADHD: predominantly inattentive, predominantly hyperactive-impulsive, and combination. Learn more about each and how to…READ MOREDebunking 5 Common Misconceptions About ADHDMedically reviewed by Heidi Moawad, M.D.Nine percent of children have ADHD and an estimated 4 percent of adults have it. In light of Mental Health Awareness month, one psychologist discusses…READ MOREADHD by the Numbers: Facts, Statistics, and YouMedically reviewed by Timothy J. Legg, PhD, PsyDAttention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is a neurodevelopmental disorder that most often occurs in children. Symptoms of ADHD include trouble…READ MOREHow Does Sensory Processing Disorder Affect Adults?Medically reviewed by Heidi Moawad, M.D.While SPD is not an official disorder, it is a part of other disorders. Managing SPD symptoms can lead to better quality of life overall. READ MOREActress Busy Philipps Says ADHD Symptoms Left Her 'Overwhelmed' Before DiagnosisWhile many people with ADHD are diagnosed as children, actor Busy Philipps is among those who received a diagnosis later in life. She is now opening…READ MOREAcetaminophen During Pregnancy Doesn't Raise Risk of Autism, ADHD, Study FindsAcetaminophen during pregnancy was not linked with children’s risk of autism, ADHD, or intellectual disability in sibling control analysis, a new…READ MOREFor People With ADHD, The Right Medication May Lower Mortality RiskAn extensive study of nearly 150,000 people in Sweden with a diagnosis of ADHD suggested that those who took medication for ADHD had a lower overall…READ MOREADHD Medication Recalled After Wrong Pills Found in BottleA lot of ADHD medication is being recalled after a pharmacist opened a pill bottle containing the wrong pills.READ MOREAbout UsContact UsPrivacy PolicyPrivacy SettingsAdvertising PolicyHealth TopicsSitemapMedical AffairsContent IntegrityNewsletters© 2024 Healthline Media LLC. All rights reserved. Our website services, content, and products are for informational purposes only. Healthline Media does not provide medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. See additional information. See additional information.© 2024 Healthline Media LLC. All rights reserved. Our website services, content, and products are for informational purposes only. Healthline Media does not provide medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. See additional information. See additional information.AboutCareersAdvertise with usOUR BRANDSHealthlineMedical News TodayGreatistPsych CentralBezzy

--------------------------------------------------

