URL: https://www.stroke.org/en/about-stroke/stroke-risk-factors/high-blood-pressure-and-stroke
Content length: 6169
Content:
High Blood Pressure and Stroke | American Stroke Association Skip to main content Stroke Symptoms Volunteer ShopHeart Donate Donate Search Search About Stroke Life After Stroke Help and Support Healthy Living Professionals Get Involved In Your Community Stroke Symptoms Volunteer SHOP Home About Stroke Stroke Risk Factors High Blood Pressure and Stroke Search High Blood Pressure and Stroke What’s blood pressure? Blood pressure is the force of blood against the walls of arteries. It’s recorded as two numbers — systolic pressure (when the heart muscle contracts) over diastolic pressure (when the heart muscle rests between beats and refills with blood). Learn more about blood pressure readings or watch an animation about blood pressure. What’s high blood pressure (hypertension)? High blood pressure is when blood flows with too much force, putting more pressure on the arteries. This excess pressure stretches the arteries beyond a healthy limit and can cause small tears. The body then kicks into an injury-healing mode to repair the tears with scar tissue. But the scar tissue traps substances that form plaque and can lead to blockages, blood clots, and hardened, weakened arteries. Several factors can increase your risk of high blood pressure, including family history, age, lack of physical activity, poor diet, social determinants, gender-related risk patterns, obesity and drinking too much alcohol. Learn more about high blood pressure risk factors. Measure your blood pressure regularly and understand what your numbers mean. Blood Pressure Chart BLOOD PRESSURE CATEGORY SYSTOLIC mm Hg (upper number) and/or DIASTOLIC mm Hg (lower number) NORMAL LESS THAN 120 and LESS THAN 80 ELEVATED 120 – 129 and LESS THAN 80 HIGH BLOOD PRESSURE (HYPERTENSION) STAGE 1 130 – 139 or 80 – 89 HIGH BLOOD PRESSURE (HYPERTENSION) STAGE 2 140 OR HIGHER or 90 OR HIGHER HYPERTENSIVE CRISIS (consult your doctor immediately) HIGHER THAN 180 and/or HIGHER THAN 120 Why manage blood pressure? Uncontrolled high blood pressure can injure or kill you. It’s called “the silent killer” because it has no apparent symptoms. Many people don’t know they have it, so regularly checking your blood pressure is crucial. High blood pressure causes damage to the arteries over time. That damage can lead to blockages and blood clots that limit blood supply to vital organs. Without oxygen and nutrients from blood, the tissue dies. That’s why high blood pressure can lead to stroke, heart attack, kidney failure, and heart failure. How do you reduce blood pressure? High blood pressure can be checked, lowered and controlled. Whether your blood pressure is high or normal, you should: Eat a healthy diet, including reducing salt intake. Engage in regular physical activity and maintain a healthy weight. Manage stress. Avoid tobacco smoke. Take your medication as prescribed. Limit your alcohol consumption. Get enough sleep. Written by American Heart Association editorial staff and reviewed by science and medicine advisors. See our editorial policies and staff. Last Reviewed: Oct 8, 2023 High Blood Pressure is the No. 1 Controllable Risk Factor for Stroke Nearly half of American adults have high blood pressure, or hypertension. Work with your doctor to keep your blood pressure in a healthy range (under 120/80). Download Infographic: the High Blood Pressure Increases Stroke Risk About Stroke Stroke Symptoms Stroke Symptoms Act F.A.S.T. Types of Stroke and Treatment Effects of Stroke Recursos en español Stroke in Children Stroke Risk Factors Stroke Risk Factors Not Within Your Control Risk Factors Under Your Control Additional Factors That May Be Linked to Higher Stroke Risks Atherosclerosis and Stroke Diabetes and Stroke Prevention Women Have a Higher Risk of Stroke High Blood Pressure and Stroke Uncommon Causes of Stroke Evaluación del riesgo de ataque o derrame cerebral Stroke Risk Assessment Stroke Connection e-news Related Articles Atherosclerosis and Stroke About Stroke Stroke Symptoms Stroke Symptoms Act F.A.S.T. Types of Stroke and Treatment Effects of Stroke Recursos en español Stroke in Children Stroke Risk Factors Stroke Risk Factors Not Within Your Control Risk Factors Under Your Control Additional Factors That May Be Linked to Higher Stroke Risks Atherosclerosis and Stroke Diabetes and Stroke Prevention Women Have a Higher Risk of Stroke High Blood Pressure and Stroke Uncommon Causes of Stroke Evaluación del riesgo de ataque o derrame cerebral Stroke Risk Assessment Stroke Connection e-news Stroke Family Warmline: 1-888-4-STROKE or 1-888-478-7653 Monday-Friday: 8:30 a.m.-5 p.m. CST Stroke.org/speakwithus *All health/medical information on this website has been reviewed and approved by the American Heart Association, based on scientific research and American Heart Association guidelines. Find more information on our content editorial process. Contact Us National Center 7272 Greenville Ave. Dallas, TX 75231 Customer Service 1-800-AHA-USA-1 1-800-242-8721 Contact Us Hours Monday - Friday: 7 a.m. – 7 p.m. CT Saturday: 9 a.m. - 5 p.m. CT Closed on Sundays Tax Identification Number 13-5613797 About Us About Us About the American Stroke Association Annual Report AHA Financial Information Careers International Programs Latest Heart and Stroke News AHA/ASA Media Newsroom Get Involved Get Involved Donate Now Make a Memorial Gift Ways to Give Advocate Volunteer ShopHeart ShopCPR Our Sites Our Sites American Heart Association CPR & ECC Professional Heart Daily More Sites AHA Careers Privacy Policy Medical Advice Disclaimer Copyright Policy Accessibility Statement Ethics Policy Conflict of Interest Policy Linking Policy Whistleblower Policy Content Editorial Guidelines Diversity Suppliers & Providers State Fundraising Notices Cookie Settings ©2024 American Heart Association, Inc. All rights reserved. Unauthorized use prohibited. The American Heart Association is a qualified 501(c)(3) tax-exempt organization. *Red Dress ™ DHHS, Go Red ™ AHA ; National Wear Red Day® is a registered trademark. × This link is provided for convenience only and is not an endorsement of either the linked-to entity or any product or service. Proceed

--------------------------------------------------

