URL: https://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/high-blood-pressure/symptoms-causes/syc-20373410
Content length: 26032
Content:
High blood pressure (hypertension) - Symptoms & causes - Mayo Clinic Skip to contentCare at Mayo Clinic Patient-Centered Care About Mayo Clinic Request Appointment Find a Doctor Locations Clinical Trials Connect to Support Groups Patient & Visitor Guide Billing & Insurance Departments & Centers International Services Contact UsPatient & Visitor Guide Health Library Diseases & Conditions Symptoms Tests & Procedures Drugs & Supplements Healthy Lifestyle Books & SubscriptionsDiseases & Conditions For Medical Professionals Medical Professional Resources Refer a Patient Continuing Medical Education AskMayoExpert Mayo Clinic Laboratories Video Center Journals & Publications Mayo Clinic Alumni AssociationContinuing Medical Education Research & Education at Mayo ClinicResearch Research at Mayo Clinic Research Faculty Laboratories Core Facilities Centers & Programs Departments & Divisions Clinical Trials Institutional Review Board Postdoctoral Fellowships Training Grant ProgramsEducation Mayo Clinic College of Medicine and Science Mayo Clinic Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences Mayo Clinic Alix School of Medicine Mayo Clinic School of Graduate Medical Education Mayo Clinic School of Health Sciences Mayo Clinic School of Continuous Professional DevelopmentMayo Clinic College of Medicine and Science Giving to Mayo Clinic Give Now Giving to Mayo Clinic Frequently Asked Questions Contact Us to GiveMake a Donation Request appointment Log inSearchMenu Request appointment Donate Diseases & conditions Find a doctorCare at Mayo Clinic Patient-Centered Care About Mayo Clinic Request Appointment Find a Doctor Locations Clinical Trials Connect to Support Groups Patient & Visitor Guide Billing & Insurance Departments & Centers International Services Contact UsPatient & Visitor Guide Health Library Diseases & Conditions Symptoms Tests & Procedures Drugs & Supplements Healthy Lifestyle Books & SubscriptionsDiseases & Conditions For Medical Professionals Medical Professional Resources Refer a Patient Continuing Medical Education AskMayoExpert Mayo Clinic Laboratories Video Center Journals & Publications Mayo Clinic Alumni AssociationContinuing Medical Education Research & Education at Mayo ClinicResearch Research at Mayo Clinic Research Faculty Laboratories Core Facilities Centers & Programs Departments & Divisions Clinical Trials Institutional Review Board Postdoctoral Fellowships Training Grant ProgramsEducation Mayo Clinic College of Medicine and Science Mayo Clinic Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences Mayo Clinic Alix School of Medicine Mayo Clinic School of Graduate Medical Education Mayo Clinic School of Health Sciences Mayo Clinic School of Continuous Professional DevelopmentMayo Clinic College of Medicine and Science Giving to Mayo Clinic Give Now Giving to Mayo Clinic Frequently Asked Questions Contact Us to GiveMake a Donation Diseases & ConditionsDiseases & ConditionsHigh blood pressure (hypertension) Request an appointmentSymptoms &causesDiagnosis &treatmentDoctors &departmentsOn this page Overview Symptoms When to see a doctor Causes Risk factors ComplicationsOverview4:15What is hypertension? A Mayo Clinic expert explains.Learn more about hypertension from nephrologist Leslie Thomas, M.D.Show TranscriptHigh blood pressure is a common condition that affects the body's arteries. It's also called hypertension. If you have high blood pressure, the force of the blood pushing against the artery walls is consistently too high. The heart has to work harder to pump blood. Blood pressure is measured in millimeters of mercury (mm Hg). In general, hypertension is a blood pressure reading of 130/80 mm Hg or higher. The American College of Cardiology and the American Heart Association divide blood pressure into four general categories. Ideal blood pressure is categorized as normal.) Normal blood pressure. Blood pressure is 120/80 mm Hg or lower. Elevated blood pressure. The top number ranges from 120 to 129 mm Hg and the bottom number is below, not above, 80 mm Hg. Stage 1 hypertension. The top number ranges from 130 to 139 mm Hg or the bottom number is between 80 and 89 mm Hg. Stage 2 hypertension. The top number is 140 mm Hg or higher or the bottom number is 90 mm Hg or higher. Blood pressure higher than 180/120 mm Hg is considered a hypertensive emergency or crisis. Seek emergency medical help for anyone with these blood pressure numbers. Untreated, high blood pressure increases the risk of heart attack, stroke and other serious health problems. It's important to have your blood pressure checked at least every two years starting at age 18. Some people need more-frequent checks. Healthy lifestyle habits —such as not smoking, exercising and eating well — can help prevent and treat high blood pressure. Some people need medicine to treat high blood pressure. High blood pressure is a common condition that affects the body's arteries. It's also called hypertension. If you have high blood pressure, the force of the blood pushing against the artery walls is consistently too high. The heart has to work harder to pump blood.Blood pressure is measured in millimeters of mercury (mm Hg). In general, hypertension is a blood pressure reading of 130/80 millimeters of mercury (mm Hg) or higher.The American College of Cardiology and the American Heart Association divide blood pressure into four general categories. Ideal blood pressure is categorized as normal. Normal blood pressure. Blood pressure is lower than 120/80 mm Hg. Elevated blood pressure. The top number ranges from 120 to 129 mm Hg and the bottom number is below, not above, 80 mm Hg. Stage 1 hypertension. The top number ranges from 130 to 139 mm Hg or the bottom number is between 80 and 89 mm Hg. Stage 2 hypertension. The top number is 140 mm Hg or higher or the bottom number is 90 mm Hg or higher. Blood pressure higher than 180/120 mm Hg is considered a hypertensive emergency or crisis. Seek emergency medical help for anyone with these blood pressure numbers.Untreated, high blood pressure increases the risk of heart attack, stroke and other serious health problems. It's important to have your blood pressure checked at least every two years starting at age 18. Some people need more-frequent checks.Healthy lifestyle habits —such as not smoking, exercising and eating well — can help prevent and treat high blood pressure. Some people need medicine to treat high blood pressure.Products & Services A Book: Mayo Clinic on High Blood Pressure Blood Pressure Monitors at Mayo Clinic Store The Mayo Clinic Diet OnlineSymptomsMost people with high blood pressure have no symptoms, even if blood pressure readings reach dangerously high levels. You can have high blood pressure for years without any symptoms.A few people with high blood pressure may have: Headaches Shortness of breath Nosebleeds However, these symptoms aren't specific. They usually don't occur until high blood pressure has reached a severe or life-threatening stage.More Information Pulse pressure: An indicator of heart health?When to see a doctorBlood pressure screening is an important part of general health care. How often you should get your blood pressure checked depends on your age and overall health.Ask your provider for a blood pressure reading at least every two years starting at age 18. If you're age 40 or older, or you're 18 to 39 with a high risk of high blood pressure, ask for a blood pressure check every year.Your care provider will likely recommend more-frequent readings if have high blood pressure or other risk factors for heart disease.Children age 3 and older may have blood pressure measured as a part of their yearly checkups.If you don't regularly see a care provider, you may be able to get a free blood pressure screening at a health resource fair or other locations in your community. Free blood pressure machines are also available in some stores and pharmacies. The accuracy of these machines depends on several things, such as a correct cuff size and proper use of the machines. Ask your health care provider for advice on using public blood pressure machines. Request an appointmentFrom Mayo Clinic to your inboxSign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview. Subscribe!Learn more about Mayo Clinic’s use of data.To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.CausesBlood pressure is determined by two things: the amount of blood the heart pumps and how hard it is for the blood to move through the arteries. The more blood the heart pumps and the narrower the arteries, the higher the blood pressure.There are two main types of high blood pressure.Primary hypertension, also called essential hypertensionFor most adults, there's no identifiable cause of high blood pressure. This type of high blood pressure is called primary hypertension or essential hypertension. It tends to develop gradually over many years. Plaque buildup in the arteries, called atherosclerosis, increases the risk of high blood pressure.Secondary hypertensionThis type of high blood pressure is caused by an underlying condition. It tends to appear suddenly and cause higher blood pressure than does primary hypertension. Conditions and medicines that can lead to secondary hypertension include: Adrenal gland tumors Blood vessel problems present at birth, also called congenital heart defects Cough and cold medicines, some pain relievers, birth control pills, and other prescription drugs Illegal drugs, such as cocaine and amphetamines Kidney disease Obstructive sleep apnea Thyroid problems Sometimes just getting a health checkup causes blood pressure to increase. This is called white coat hypertension.More Information Medications and supplements that can raise your blood pressure Anxiety: A cause of high blood pressure? Blood pressure readings: Why higher at home? Blood pressure: Does it have a daily pattern?Show more related information Caffeine and hypertension Can having vitamin D deficiency cause high blood pressure? Sleep deprivation: A cause of high blood pressure?Risk factorsHigh blood pressure has many risk factors, including: Age. The risk of high blood pressure increases with age. Until about age 64, high blood pressure is more common in men. Women are more likely to develop high blood pressure after age 65. Race. High blood pressure is particularly common among Black people. It develops at an earlier age in Black people than it does in white people. Family history. You're more likely to develop high blood pressure if you have a parent or sibling with the condition. Obesity or being overweight. Excess weight causes changes in the blood vessels, the kidneys and other parts of the body. These changes often increase blood pressure. Being overweight or having obesity also raises the risk of heart disease and its risk factors, such as high cholesterol. Lack of exercise. Not exercising can cause weight gain. Increased weight raises the risk of high blood pressure. People who are inactive also tend to have higher heart rates. Tobacco use or vaping. Smoking, chewing tobacco or vaping immediately raises blood pressure for a short while. Tobacco smoking injures blood vessel walls and speeds up the process of hardening of the arteries. If you smoke, ask your care provider for strategies to help you quit. Too much salt. A lot of salt — also called sodium — in the body can cause the body to retain fluid. This increases blood pressure. Low potassium levels. Potassium helps balance the amount of salt in the body's cells. A proper balance of potassium is important for good heart health. Low potassium levels may be due to a lack of potassium in the diet or certain health conditions, including dehydration. Drinking too much alcohol. Alcohol use has been linked with increased blood pressure, particularly in men. Stress. High levels of stress can lead to a temporary increase in blood pressure. Stress-related habits such as eating more, using tobacco or drinking alcohol can lead to further increases in blood pressure. Certain chronic conditions. Kidney disease, diabetes and sleep apnea are some of the conditions that can lead to high blood pressure. Pregnancy. Sometimes pregnancy causes high blood pressure. High blood pressure is most common in adults. But kids can have high blood pressure too. High blood pressure in children may be caused by problems with the kidneys or heart. But for a growing number of kids, high blood pressure is due to lifestyle habits such as an unhealthy diet and lack of exercise.ComplicationsThe excessive pressure on the artery walls caused by high blood pressure can damage blood vessels and body organs. The higher the blood pressure and the longer it goes uncontrolled, the greater the damage.Uncontrolled high blood pressure can lead to complications including: Heart attack or stroke. Hardening and thickening of the arteries due to high blood pressure or other factors can lead to a heart attack, stroke or other complications. Aneurysm. Increased blood pressure can cause a blood vessel to weaken and bulge, forming an aneurysm. If an aneurysm ruptures, it can be life-threatening. Heart failure. When you have high blood pressure, the heart has to work harder to pump blood. The strain causes the walls of the heart's pumping chamber to thicken. This condition is called left ventricular hypertrophy. Eventually, the heart can't pump enough blood to meet the body's needs, causing heart failure. Kidney problems. High blood pressure can cause the blood vessels in the kidneys to become narrow or weak. This can lead to kidney damage. Eye problems. Increased blood pressure can cause thickened, narrowed or torn blood vessels in the eyes. This can result in vision loss. Metabolic syndrome. This syndrome is a group of disorders of the body's metabolism. It involves the irregular breakdown of sugar, also called glucose. The syndrome includes increased waist size, high triglycerides, decreased high-density lipoprotein (HDL or "good") cholesterol, high blood pressure and high blood sugar levels. These conditions make you more likely to develop diabetes, heart disease and stroke. Changes with memory or understanding. Uncontrolled high blood pressure may affect the ability to think, remember and learn. Dementia. Narrowed or blocked arteries can limit blood flow to the brain. This can cause a certain type of dementia called vascular dementia. A stroke that interrupts blood flow to the brain also can cause vascular dementia. More Information High blood pressure and sex High blood pressure dangers Hypertensive crisis: What are the symptoms? Request an appointment By Mayo Clinic StaffFeb 29, 2024 PrintShow ReferencesHigh blood pressure. National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute. https://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/health/high-blood-pressure. Accessed July 18, 2022.Flynn JT, et al. Clinical practice guideline for screening and management of high blood pressure in children and adolescents. Pediatrics. 2017; doi:10.1542/peds.2017-1904.Physical Activity Guidelines for Americans. 2nd ed. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. https://health.gov/our-work/physical-activity/current-guidelines. Accessed June 15, 2022.Hypertension in adults: Screening. U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. https://uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/uspstf/recommendation/hypertension-in-adults-screening. Accessed July 18, 2022.Thomas G, et al. Blood pressure measurement in the diagnosis and treatment of hypertension in adults. https://www.uptodate.com/contents/search. Accessed July 18, 2022.Muntner P, et al. Measurement of blood pressure in humans: A scientific statement from the American Heart Association. Hypertension. 2019; doi:10.1161/HYP.0000000000000087.Basile J, et al. Overview of hypertension in adults. https://www.uptodate.com/contents/search. Accessed July 22, 2022.Know your risk factors for high blood pressure. American Heart Association. https://www.heart.org/en/health-topics/high-blood-pressure/why-high-blood-pressure-is-a-silent-killer/know-your-risk-factors-for-high-blood-pressure. Accessed July 18, 2022.Rethinking drinking. Alcohol and your health. National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism. https://www.rethinkingdrinking.niaaa.nih.gov/Default.aspx. Accessed July 18, 2022.Libby P, et al., eds. Systemic hypertension: Mechanisms, diagnosis, and treatment. In: Braunwald's Heart Disease: A Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine. 12th ed. Elsevier; 2022. https://www.clinicalkey.com. Accessed July 18, 2022.AskMayoExpert. Hypertension (adult). Mayo Clinic; 2021.About metabolic syndrome. American Heart Association. https://www.heart.org/en/health-topics/metabolic-syndrome/about-metabolic-syndrome. Accessed July 18, 2022.Understanding blood pressure readings. American Heart Association. https://www.heart.org/en/health-topics/high-blood-pressure/understanding-blood-pressure-readings. Accessed July 18, 2022.Whelton PK, et al. 2017 ACC/AHA/AAPA/ABC/ACPM/AGS/APhA/ASH/ASPC/NMA/PCNA guideline for the prevention, detection, evaluation, and management of high blood pressure in adults: A report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines. Hypertension. 2018; doi:10.1161/HYP.0000000000000065.Monitoring your blood pressure at home. American Heart Association. https://www.heart.org/en/health-topics/high-blood-pressure/understanding-blood-pressure-readings/monitoring-your-blood-pressure-at-home. Accessed July 18, 2022.Mann JF. Choice of drug therapy in primary (essential) hypertension. https://www.uptodate.com/contents/search. Accessed July 18, 2022.Agasthi P, et al. Renal denervation for resistant hypertension in the contemporary era: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Scientific Reports. 2019; doi:10.1038/s41598-019-42695-9.Chernova I, et al. Resistant hypertension updated guidelines. Current Cardiology Reports. 2019; doi:10.1007/s11886-019-1209-6.Forman JP, et al. Diet in the treatment and prevention of hypertension. https://www.uptodate.com/contents/search. Accessed July 18, 2022.Goldman L, et al., eds. Cognitive impairment and dementia. In: Goldman-Cecil Medicine. 26th ed. Elsevier; 2020. https://www.clinicalkey.com. Accessed July 18, 2022.Managing stress to control high blood pressure. American Heart Association. https://www.heart.org/en/health-topics/high-blood-pressure/changes-you-can-make-to-manage-high-blood-pressure/managing-stress-to-control-high-blood-pressure. Accessed July 18, 2022.Brenner J, et al. Mindfulness with paced breathing reduces blood pressure. Medical Hypothesis. 2020; doi:10.1016/j.mehy.2020.109780.Grundy SM, et al. 2018 AHA/ACC/AACVPR/AAPA/ABC/ACPM/ADA/AGS/APhA/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Guideline on the management of blood cholesterol: A report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 2019; doi:10.1161/CIR.0000000000000625.Monitoring your blood pressure at home. American Heart Association. https://www.heart.org/en/health-topics/high-blood-pressure/understanding-blood-pressure-readings/monitoring-your-blood-pressure-at-home. Accessed July 22, 2022.Natural medicines in the clinical management of hypertension. Natural Medicines. https://naturalmedicines.therapeuticresearch.com. Accessed Dec. 20, 2020.Saper RB, et al. Overview of herbal medicine and dietary supplements. https://www.uptodate.com/contents/search. Accessed July 18, 2022.Lopez-Jimenez F (expert opinion). Mayo Clinic. Aug. 19, 2022.2020-2025 Dietary Guidelines for Americans. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services and U.S. Department of Agriculture. https://www.dietaryguidelines.gov. Accessed July 18, 2022.Börjesson M, et al. Physical activity and exercise lower blood pressure in individuals with hypertension: Narrative review of 27 RCTs. British Journal of Sports Medicine. 2016; doi:10.1136/bjsports-2015-095786.Lloyd-Jones DM, et al. Life's essential 8: Updating and enhancing the American Heart Association's construct of cardiovascular health: A presidential advisory from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2022; doi:10.1161/CIR.0000000000001078.American Heart Association adds sleep to cardiovascular health checklist. American Heart Association. https://newsroom.heart.org/news/american-heart-association-adds-sleep-to-cardiovascular-health-checklist. Accessed July 15, 2022. Diagnosis & treatmentDiseases & ConditionsHigh blood pressure (hypertension) symptoms & causesNews from Mayo Clinic Mayo Clinic Minute: Is salt sneaking into your diet? Mayo Clinic Q and A: What time is best for blood pressure medication? Mayo Clinic Minute: Are you using a salt substitute? Isometric exercise: Using body weight to lower blood pressureShow More Mayo Clinic Minute: High blood pressure hurts the kidneysMore Information Alcohol: Does it affect blood pressure? Alpha blockers Angiotensin II receptor blockers Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitorsShow more related content Anxiety: A cause of high blood pressure? Beta blockers Beta blockers: Do they cause weight gain? Beta blockers: How do they affect exercise? Blood pressure chart Blood pressure cuff: Does size matter? Blood pressure medication: Still necessary if I lose weight? Blood pressure medications: Can they raise my triglycerides? Blood pressure readings: Why higher at home? Blood pressure: Can it be higher in one arm? Blood pressure: Does it have a daily pattern? Blood pressure: Is it affected by cold weather? Caffeine and hypertension Calcium channel blockers Calcium supplements: Do they interfere with blood pressure drugs? Can having vitamin D deficiency cause high blood pressure? Can whole-grain foods lower blood pressure? Central-acting agents Choosing blood pressure medicines Diuretics Diuretics: A cause of low potassium? Free blood pressure machines: Are they accurate? High blood pressure and cold remedies: Which are safe? High blood pressure and exercise High blood pressure and sex High blood pressure dangers Home blood pressure monitoring How to measure blood pressure using a manual monitor How to measure blood pressure using an automatic monitor Hypertension FAQs Hypertensive crisis: What are the symptoms? Isolated systolic hypertension: A health concern? L-arginine: Does it lower blood pressure? Medication-free hypertension control Medications and supplements that can raise your blood pressure Menopause and high blood pressure: What's the connection? Picnic Problems: High Sodium Pulse pressure: An indicator of heart health? Resperate: Can it help reduce blood pressure? Sleep deprivation: A cause of high blood pressure? Stress and high blood pressure Vasodilators What is blood pressure? What is hypertension? A Mayo Clinic expert explains. White coat hypertension Wrist blood pressure monitors: Are they accurate?Associated Procedures Blood pressure testProducts & Services A Book: Mayo Clinic on High Blood Pressure Blood Pressure Monitors at Mayo Clinic Store The Mayo Clinic Diet OnlineCON-XXXXXXXXSkip AdvertisementAdvertisementMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission. Advertising & SponsorshipPolicyOpportunitiesAd ChoicesMayo Clinic PressCheck out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press. Mayo Clinic on Incontinence The Essential Diabetes Book Mayo Clinic on Hearing and Balance FREE Mayo Clinic Diet Assessment Mayo Clinic Health Letter - FREE bookSkip AdvertisementAdvertisementHelp transform healthcare Give TodayYour donation can make a difference in the future of healthcare. Give now to support Mayo Clinic's research. Give Today Find a doctor Explore careers Sign up for free e-newslettersAbout Mayo Clinic About this Site Contact Us Locations Health Information Policy Medicare Accountable Care Organization (ACO) Media Requests News Network Price TransparencyMedical Professionals AskMayoExpert Clinical Trials Mayo Clinic Alumni Association Refer a PatientBusinesses Executive Health Program International Business Collaborations Facilities & Real Estate Supplier InformationMedical Professionals AskMayoExpert Clinical Trials Mayo Clinic Alumni Association Refer a PatientBusinesses Executive Health Program International Business Collaborations Facilities & Real Estate Supplier InformationStudents Admissions Requirements Degree Programs Student & Faculty PortalStudents Degree Programs Admissions Requirements Student & Faculty PortalResearchers Research Faculty LaboratoriesInternational Patients Appointments Financial Services International Locations & OfficesCharitable Care & Financial Assistance Community Health Needs Assessment Financial Assistance Documents – Arizona Financial Assistance Documents – Florida Financial Assistance Documents – MinnesotaFollow Mayo Clinic X Youtube Facebook Linkedin InstagramGet the Mayo Clinic app Terms & Conditions Privacy Policy Notice of Privacy Practices Notice of Nondiscrimination Accessibility Statement Advertising & Sponsorship Policy Site Map Manage Cookies Terms and Conditions Privacy Policy Notice of Privacy Practices Notice of Nondiscrimination Accessibility Statement Advertising and Sponsorship Policy Site Map Manage CookiesLanguage:English English Español العربية 简体中文© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved. Language:English English Español العربية 简体中文

--------------------------------------------------

