URL: https://www.redcrossblood.org/donate-blood/dlp/blood-pressure-donors.html
Content length: 14396
Content:
High Blood Pressure Information for Blood Donors | Red Cross Blood Find a Blood Drive Sign In Español News & Promotions Visit RedCross.org Donate Blood Manage My Donations Schedule an Appointment Manage Existing Appointment Start RapidPass® View My Donation History Get Digital Donor Card Get the Blood Donor App How to Donate Find a Blood Drive Eligibility Requirements Types of Blood Donations Learn About Blood How Blood Donations Help Common Concerns Blood Donation Process Donation Process Overview What to do Before, During and After What Happens to Donated Blood First Time Blood Donors Iron and Blood Donation Benefits of Donating Blood Health Assessment Diverse Blood Supply COVID-19 Safety Protocols Hosting a Blood Drive Manage My Blood Drive Blood Program Leader Login Blood Program Leader Toolkit Premier Blood Partners Learn About Hosting Why Host a Blood Drive? How Hosting a Blood Drive Works Hosting a Blood Drive FAQ COVID-19 Safety Precautions Host a Blood Drive Apply to Host a Blood Drive Start a Virtual Blood Drive Biomedical Services Leading Expertise Who We Are What We Do Medical Office Laboratory Leadership Hospital Resources CONNECT Online Ordering SUCCESS® Online Learning Hospital Partner Resource Guide Forms & Certificates Industry Resources News & Announcements PLUS Blog Immunohematology Journal Scientific Research Products & Services Blood Products Laboratory Testing Services Clinical Apheresis Services Cell & Gene Therapy Solutions Find a Blood Drive Emergency Blood and Platelet Shortage The Red Cross national blood product supply has fallen by more than 25% since July 1. The Red Cross is working with hospitals around the clock to meet the blood needs of patients – but can’t do it alone. We need donors, like you, to help provide this lifesaving care. Please make your appointment now Give Platelets Give Blood Home High Blood Pressure Information for Blood Donors Share via Email Share on Facebook Share on Twitter Toggle other share options Share on LinkedIn Print Español High Blood Pressure Information for Blood Donors Your health is an important part of your donor journey and key to continuing to help others in need. The American Red Cross is committed to helping you maintain your well-being by providing valuable health information throughout the donation process. Your vitals from each donation are recorded in your secure online donor record, helping you easily track your hemoglobin levels, pulse rate and blood pressure. This can help you monitor for health conditions such as high blood pressure – also known as hypertension, allowing you to view your blood pressure trends over time and share this information with your health care provider. About High Blood Pressure While high blood pressure, also called hypertension, is easy to detect, unfortunately, physicians believe high blood pressure is significantly underdiagnosed and undertreated in the U.S. Hypertension is also very common among Red Cross blood, platelet and plasma donors, with about 20% of donors showing signs of possible hypertension. It is our hope that, by providing potentially lifesaving health information to our blood donors, we can help bridge existing gaps in care. High Blood Pressure Explained High blood pressure is a common condition that affects almost half the adult population in the U.S. High blood pressure causes blood to flow through your arteries at higher-than-normal pressures. The higher your blood pressure levels, the harder your heart has to work to pump blood, which may cause injury to the heart, kidneys and other vital organs and increase risk for other serious health problems, such as heart failure, heart attack, kidney failure and stroke. Signs and Symptoms of High Blood Pressure High blood pressure is called the “silent killer” because it usually has no warning signs or symptoms. People can have high blood pressure for years without any symptoms – even when blood pressure readings reach dangerously high levels or injury is occurring gradually over time. Causes of High Blood Pressure High blood pressure usually develops over time and becomes more common as we age. Contributing factors may include smoking cigarettes, alcohol consumption, lack of physical activity and/or having a family history of hypertension. Certain health conditions, such as being overweight or having diabetes, may also increase your chances of developing hypertension. Blood Pressure and Blood Donation It is safe for most people with high blood pressure to give blood, including those taking high blood pressure medication. Only donors with blood pressure greater than 180/100 mmHg on the day of donation, which indicates an urgent medical issue that should be quickly addressed by a health care provider, are unable to give. Red Cross blood donors can access blood pressure readings from past donations and view a trend of those readings from their most recent donations in a secure platform in the Health Charts section of the Red Cross Blood Donor App or the My Health Screening section of the online Blood Donor Portal. Many people who have hypertension are able to donate but may not realize that they need to take steps to protect their health. By providing health data to donors, the Red Cross can help them better understand their own health and wellness and be alerted to potential health issues they were not aware of – thereby helping them make informed choices about their health. Health Charts and past readings in the Blood Donor App My Health Screenings in the online Blood Donor Portal Managing Your Blood Pressure It’s important that people check their blood pressure on a regular basis. Blood pressure is best managed in partnership with your health care provider, who may suggest dietary changes, lifestyle changes and/or medication to manage high blood pressure. Know Your Numbers There is only one way to know if you have high blood pressure – and that is to check your blood pressure regularly. A health care provider can diagnose high blood pressure by reviewing your systolic and diastolic blood pressure levels. It is usually necessary for providers to have more than one blood pressure reading to diagnose hypertension. Viewing multiple measurements taken at blood drives and other community locations over time can help your health care provider make their assessment and draw attention to an emerging issue sooner. In 2017, the American College of Cardiology and the American Heart Association published new guidelines for hypertension management following the results of an important clinical trial and defined high blood pressure as blood pressure at or above 130/80 mmHg, as seen in the table below. Additional Tips to Manage Your Blood Pressure Maintaining your heart health is a lifelong commitment. In addition to following the guidance of your physician or health care provider, here are a few steps people can take that may lower their risk of developing high blood pressure: Eat a well-balanced diet with less salt Participate in regular physical activity Limit your consumption of alcohol Quit smoking Manage your stress Learn more about blood pressure and how to manage hypertension from trusted sources: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention American Heart Association Frequently Asked Questions What is blood pressure? Blood pressure is the pressure being put on your artery walls as your heart pumps blood throughout your body. Your blood pressure normally rises and falls throughout the day, depending on activity. If the pressure is consistently too high, it may result in a diagnosis of high blood pressure. What do blood pressure numbers mean? Blood pressure is measured using two numbers (example: 120/80). The first number is your systolic pressure. That measures the maximum pressure being exerted against your artery walls when your heart beats, pumping blood into your arteries. The second number is your diastolic pressure. That measures the pressure in your arteries when your heart is filling with blood. When a Red Cross staff member measures your blood pressure at the time of donation, they’ll use the measurement format “X over Y.” A normal blood pressure for most adults is less than 120 over 80. The mmHg is the units and stands for “millimeters of mercury.” This is a measure that has been used for a long time and corresponds to the height that a column of mercury would reach in response to the pressure inside the body. What is high blood pressure? High blood pressure, also called hypertension, is a common condition where blood flows through your arteries at higher-than-normal pressures, causing the heart to work harder to pump blood and potentially causing injury to your heart and other vital organs. Hypertension is a very common medical condition that increases risks of stroke, heart disease and kidney disease if left untreated. How is high blood pressure diagnosed? High blood pressure must be diagnosed by a physician or health care provider. While the Red Cross provides information to help diagnose high blood pressure, it is important for individuals to see a health care provider for formal diagnosis and treatment recommendations. What are the health effects of high blood pressure? Untreated, high blood pressure slowly causes injury to many of the organs in the body. As a result of this, ongoing high blood pressure increases the risk of heart attacks, strokes, kidney disease and diseases resulting from damage to blood vessels, such as retinal disease, aneurysms and dementia. What is a hypertensive crisis? A hypertensive crisis is a severe increase in blood pressure. According to the American Heart Association, the blood pressure reading is greater than 180/120 mmHg. A hypertensive crisis is a medical emergency that can lead to a heart attack, stroke or other life-threatening health problems without prompt treatment. Who is most at-risk for high blood pressure? High blood pressure is a common medical condition that affects approximately half of all adults in the United States. All donors with high blood pressure would benefit from taking steps to reduce their blood pressure. In addition, it is known that individuals who are African American are at higher risk for high blood pressure overall, as well as for the development of high blood pressure earlier in life, and more severe high blood pressure, compared to people of other backgrounds. African Americans are also at higher risk of suffering from the health consequences of untreated high blood pressure, such as kidney failure and heart disease. Is high blood pressure more prevalent in certain communities? It has been recognized by the American College of Cardiology that a combination of genetic and social factors, as well as variable medication response and adherence, reduced access to health care and other factors all contribute to racial disparities in hypertension. As a result of these prevailing health disparities across our country, individuals who are African American are more likely to be at risk for more severe forms of high blood pressure and may develop high blood pressure while they are relatively young. African Americans are also most likely to have high blood pressure despite treatment, in part due to reduced effect of some types of blood pressure medication, but also because more than one medication may be needed. In some cases, there may be barriers to receiving medication, as well. Why is the Red Cross sharing more information about high blood pressure with blood donors? The Red Cross values the health and well-being of its blood donors across the country and desires to play an active role in the broader care of our communities. We applaud the generosity of thousands of individuals who donate blood and believe the Red Cross has a responsibility to give back to those who so selflessly roll up a sleeve. The Red Cross can help donors to better understand their own health and wellness and be alerted to potential health issues they were not aware of, thereby helping individuals make informed choices about their health. Sharing health data also helps the Red Cross gain awareness of specific health needs of communities and may help us understand which communities may need additional resources. While high blood pressure is easy to detect, unfortunately, physicians believe high blood pressure is significantly both underdiagnosed and undertreated in the U.S. It is our hope that by providing potentially lifesaving health information to our blood donors, we can help bridge existing gaps in care. Many treatments for hypertension are safe, well-tolerated, relatively inexpensive and widely available. Fortunately, when high blood pressure is adequately treated, the serious health risks, such as kidney and heart diseases, are greatly reduced and may be avoided. Can I give blood if I have high blood pressure? It is safe for individuals who have well-managed high blood pressure to give blood. Individuals are also not deferred for high blood pressure medication. The Red Cross only defers donors with blood pressure greater than 180/100 mmHg, when hypertension should be quickly addressed by a health care provider. If you are deferred for high blood pressure, you will also be given an information sheet at your blood donation. Can donors access their past/current blood pressure readings? If so, how? Yes, donor health information is stored in the donor’s health history record and available to each individual in a secure platform through the Red Cross Blood Donor App or online Blood Donor Portal. In the Blood Donor App, individuals can go to the Health Charts button. From there, individuals can go to the charts tab which allows each donor to see their blood pressure trends over time and share this information with their provider. Donors can also scroll to the health history tab to view their health vitals by visit. For online accounts, visit https://www.redcrossblood.org/give.html/my-account Click the My Health Screening on the left navigation bar to see your most recent vitals and the health vitals chart. If you click See My Donation History on the left navigation bar, you can see past appointments listed. Below each appointment date there is a + that can be clicked to see the vitals by date. © 2024 The American National Red Cross Contact Us About Us RedCross.org Accessibility Terms of Use Privacy Policy Supporters News

--------------------------------------------------

