URL: https://www.psychiatry.org/patients-families/adhd/what-is-adhd
Content length: 31133
Content:
Psychiatry.org - What is ADHD? Skip to content About APA About APA submenu APA's Vision, Mission, Values, and Goals Meet Our Organization Read APA Organization Documents and Policies Work At APA About APA's Headquarters Policy Finder Contact Us Newsroom Newsroom submenu News Releases Messages from the APA President Reporting on Mental Health Conditions APA Blogs Goldwater Rule Annual Meeting Press Registration + Guidelines APA Public Opinion Polls Reporter Toolkit: Recommendations on Covering the AAPI Community Comunicados de prensa en español Advocacy & APAPAC APA Sites APA Sites submenu APA Annual Meeting APA Communities APA Foundation APA JobCentral APA Learning Center APA Publishing Center for Workplace Mental Health Melvin Sabshin, M.D. Library & Archives Psychiatric News Psychiatry Online Sign In This search input has a predictive search function. When 3 letters or more are entered, a number of predictive results appear in a dropdown. Use arrow keys to navigate and use the enter key to go to the page highlighted. Search Psychiatry.org Search RENEW JOIN Open Search Modal Dashboard Search Close search Search Psychiatry.org Search Psychiatrists Psychiatrists submenu Education Education Annual Meeting APA Learning Center APA On Demand At the APA Educational Series Books and Journals Certification and Licensure Diversity and Health Equity Education Resources Meeting Submission and Guidelines Mental Health Innovation Zone Podcasts The Mental Health Services Conference The Virtual Immersive Virtual Paid Courses Practice Practice Clinical Practice Guidelines Covid-19 / Coronavirus Digital Mental Health DSM Ethics Helping Patients Access Care Media and Communications Mental Health Apps Mental Health Parity Practice Management Professional Interests Quality Improvement Risk Management Social Media Sunshine Act Telepsychiatry The Clozapine Risk Evaluation and Mitigation Strategy (REMS) Program Transition to Practice and Early Career Resources Well-being and Burnout Diversity & Health Equity Diversity & Health Equity Advocacy Education Governance Mental Health and Faith Community Partnership Mental Health Equity Looking Beyond Series Minority and Underrepresented (M/UR) Caucuses Moore Equity in Mental Health Initiative News and Updates Striving for Excellence Series Workforce Research & Registry Research & Registry AMNet: Addiction Medicine Practice Based Research Network DMS-5-TR PsychPRO: APA's Mental Health Registry Research Colloquium for Junior Psychiatrist Investigators Perinatal Mental Health Toolkit Psychiatric Bed Crisis Report Advocacy & APAPAC Advocacy & APAPAC Advocacy Action Center APAPAC Congressional Advocacy Network Election Resource Center Federal Affairs State Affairs Implementing 9-8-8 Advocacy Update Webinars Meetings & Events Meetings & Events 2025 Annual Meeting The 2024 Mental Health Services Conference Addressing Structural Racism Town Hall Series APA Meetings App Governance Meetings Mental Health Equity Fireside Chat Series Moore Equity in Mental Health 5K Policy & Practice Insights Series September Component Meetings Social Determinants of Mental Health Town Hall Series Search Directories & Databases Search Directories & Databases Amicus Briefs APA Communities Assembly Directory Component Directory Conference Publications Library and Archive Member Directory Member Obituaries Policy Finder Practice Guidelines Resource Documents International International International Trainees International Humanitarian Opportunities Global Mental Health International Medical Graduates Resources Residents & Medical Students Residents & Medical Students submenu Residents Residents 100% Club Residents' Journal Featured Publications APA/APAF Fellowships External Fellowships and Awards Helping Residents Cope with a Patient Suicide International Medical Graduates Resources MindGames Vacant Resident Positions Leadership Positions SET for Success Medical Students Medical Students Apply for Psychiatric Residency Choosing a Career in Psychiatry Building a Career in Psychiatry Medical Student Programs PsychSIGN Resident-Fellow Census Transitioning to Residency During COVID-19 Patients and Families Patients and Families submenu Patients and Families View All Topics What is Psychiatry? Find a Psychiatrist Addiction and Substance Use Disorders Dementia and Alzheimer's Disease Alcohol Use Disorder Anxiety Disorders Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) Autism Spectrum Disorder Bipolar Disorders Climate Change and Mental Health Connections Coping After Disaster Depression Disruptive, Impulse-Control and Conduct Disorders Dissociative Disorders Domestic Violence Eating Disorders E-Cigarettes and Vaping Gambling Disorder Gender Dysphoria Helping a Loved One Cope with Mental Illness Hoarding Disorder Integrated Behavioral Healthcare Intellectual Disability Internet Gaming Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder Opioid Use Disorder Perinatal Depression (formerly Postpartum) Personality Disorders Posttraumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) Prolonged Grief Disorder Schizophrenia Seasonal Affective Disorder (SAD) Sleep Disorders Somatic Symptom Disorder Specific Learning Disorders Stigma, Prejudice and Discrimination Against People with Mental Illness Suicide Prevention Technology Addictions: Social Media, Online Gaming, and More Warning Signs of Mental Illness Electroconvulsive Therapy (ECT) What is Mental Illness? What is Psychotherapy? What is Telepsychiatry? La Salud Mental Childhood Disorders: Medication Guides for Parents Lifestyle to Support Mental Health Membership Membership submenu Join APA Join APA General Members Early Career Psychiatrists Residents and Fellows Medical Students International International Resident-Fellows Semi-Retired and Retired View Your Profile Member Benefits Member Benefits General Members Early Career Psychiatrists Resident-Fellow Members Medical Students International International Resident-Fellows Semi-Retired and Retired Honorary Fellowship (FAPA & DFAPA) Honorary Fellowship (FAPA & DFAPA) Fellow of the APA Distinguished Fellow of the APA International Fellow of the APA International Distinguished Fellow of the APA 2024 Class of Honorary Fellows Awards & Leadership Opportunities Awards & Leadership Opportunities Awards 2025 APA National Elections Councils, Committees and Components Resident-Fellow Leadership Opportunities Get Involved Get Involved Advocacy and APAPAC APA/APAF Fellowships APA Insider Sessions APA Specialty Interest Caucuses, Listservs & Communities Leadership, Equity and Diversity Institute Medical Student Programs Mentorship Program for APA/APAF Fellows Minority and Underrepresented (M/UR) Caucuses Research Colloquium Directories, Contact Info & FAQs Directories, Contact Info & FAQs Contact Your Membership Specialist Contact Your District Branch Membership FAQs Semi-Retired and Retired FAQs Lump Sum Dues Member Directory Assembly Directory Component Directory District Branches District Branches District Branch Resources District Branch Dues for General Members District Branch Dues for Residents and Fellows What is ADHD? You are here: Patients and Families Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity... What is ADHD? Share Print Sub Navigation Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) Toggle Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) Page Listing What is ADHD? Expert Q&A: ADHD On This Page Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is one of the most common mental disorders affecting children. Symptoms of ADHD include inattention (not being able to keep focus), hyperactivity (excess movement that is not fitting to the setting) and impulsivity (hasty acts that occur in the moment without thought). ADHD is considered a chronic and debilitating disorder and is known to impact the individual in many aspects of their life including academic and professional achievements, interpersonal relationships, and daily functioning (Harpin, 2005). ADHD can lead to poor self-esteem and social function in children when not appropriately treated (Harpin et al., 2016). Adults with ADHD may experience poor self-worth, sensitivity towards criticism, and increased self-criticism possibly stemming from higher levels of criticism throughout life (Beaton, et al., 2022). Of note, ADHD presentation and assessment in adults differs; this page focuses on children. An estimated 8.4% of children and 2.5% of adults have ADHD (Danielson, 2018; Simon, et al., 2009). ADHD is often first identified in school-aged children when it leads to disruption in the classroom or problems with schoolwork. It is more commonly diagnosed among boys than girls given differences in how the symptoms present. However, this does not mean that boys are more likely to have ADHD. Boys tend to present with hyperactivity and other externalizing symptoms whereas girls tend to have inactivity. Symptoms and Diagnosis Many children may have difficulties sitting still, waiting their turn, paying attention, being fidgety, and acting impulsively. However, children who meet diagnostic criteria for ADHD, differ in that their symptoms of hyperactivity, impulsivity, organization, and/or inattention are noticeably greater than expected for their age or developmental level. These symptoms lead to significant suffering and cause problems at home, at school or work, and in relationships. The observed symptoms are not the result of an individual being defiant or not being able to understand tasks or instructions. There are three main types of ADHD: Predominantly inattentive presentation. Predominantly hyperactive/impulsive presentation. Combined presentation. A diagnosis is based on the presence of persistent symptoms that have occurred over a period of time and are noticeable over the past six months. While ADHD can be diagnosed at any age, this disorder begins in childhood. When considering the diagnosis, the symptoms must be present before the individual is 12 years old and must have caused difficulties in more than one setting. For instance, the symptoms can not only occur at home. Inattentive type Inattentive refers to challenges with staying on task, focusing, and organization. For a diagnosis of this type of ADHD, six (or five for individuals who are 17 years old or older) of the following symptoms occur frequently: Doesn’t pay close attention to details or makes careless mistakes in school or job tasks. Has problems staying focused on tasks or activities, such as during lectures, conversations or long reading. Does not seem to listen when spoken to (i.e., seems to be elsewhere). Does not follow through on instructions and doesn’t complete schoolwork, chores or job duties (may start tasks but quickly loses focus). Has problems organizing tasks and work (for instance, does not manage time well; has messy, disorganized work; misses deadlines). Avoids or dislikes tasks that require sustained mental effort, such as preparing reports and completing forms. Often loses things needed for tasks or daily life, such as school papers, books, keys, wallet, cell phone and eyeglasses. Is easily distracted. Forgets daily tasks, such as doing chores and running errands. Older teens and adults may forget to return phone calls, pay bills and keep appointments. Hyperactive/impulsive type Hyperactivity refers to excessive movement such as fidgeting, excessive energy, not sitting still, and being talkative. Impulsivity refers to decisions or actions taken without thinking through the consequences. For a diagnosis of this type of ADHD, six (or five for individuals who are 17 years old or older) of the following symptoms occur frequently: Fidgets with or taps hands or feet, or squirms in seat. Not able to stay seated (in classroom, workplace). Runs about or climbs where it is inappropriate. Unable to play or do leisure activities quietly. Always “on the go,” as if driven by a motor. Talks too much. Blurts out an answer before a question has been finished (for instance may finish people’s sentences, can’t wait to speak in conversations). Has difficulty waiting for his or her turn, such as while waiting in line. Interrupts or intrudes on others (for instance, cuts into conversations, games or activities, or starts using other people’s things without permission). Older teens and adults may take over what others are doing. Combined type This type of ADHD is diagnosed when both criteria for both inattentive and hyperactive/impulse types are met. ADHD is typically diagnosed by mental health providers or primary care providers. A psychiatric evaluation will include a description of symptoms from the patient and caregivers, completion of scales and questionnaires by patient, caregivers and teachers, complete psychiatric and medical history, family history, and information regarding education, environment, and upbringing. It may also include a referral for medical evaluation to rule out other medical conditions. It is important to note that several conditions can mimic ADHD such as learning disorders, mood disorders, anxiety, substance use, head injuries, thyroid conditions, and use of some medications such as steroids (Austerman, 2015). ADHD may also co-exist with other mental health conditions, such as oppositional defiant disorder or conduct disorder, anxiety disorders, and learning disorders (Austerman, 2015). Thus, a full psychiatric evaluation is very important. There are no specific blood tests or routine imaging for ADHD diagnosis. Sometimes, patients may be referred for additional psychological testing (such as neuropsychological or psychoeducational testing) or may undergo computer-based tests to assess the severity of symptoms. The Causes of ADHD Scientists have not yet identified the specific causes of ADHD. While there is growing evidence that genetics contribute to ADHD and several genes have been linked to the disorder, no specific gene or gene combination has been identified as the cause of the disorder. However, it is important to note that relatives of individuals with ADHD are often also affected. There is evidence of anatomical differences in the brains of children with ADHD in comparison to other children without the condition. For instance, children with ADHD have reduced grey and white brain matter volume and demonstrate different brain region activation during certain tasks (Pliszka, 2007). Further studies have indicated that the frontal lobes, caudate nucleus, and cerebellar vermis of the brain are affected in ADHD (Tripp & Wickens, 2009). Several non-genetic factors have also been linked to the disorder such as low birth weight, premature birth, exposure to toxins (alcohol, smoking, lead, etc.) during pregnancy, and extreme stress during pregnancy. Treatment ADHD treatment usually encompasses a combination of therapy and medication intervention. In preschool-age and younger children, the recommended first-line approach includes behavioral strategies in the form of parent management training and school intervention. Parent-Child Interaction Therapy (PCIT) is an evidence-based therapy modality to help young children with ADHD and oppositional defiant disorder. ADHD Parent's Medication Guide (.pdf) According to current guidelines, psychostimulants (amphetamines and methylphenidate) are first-line pharmacological treatments for the management of ADHD (Pliszka, 2007). In preschool-aged patients with ADHD, amphetamines are the only FDA-approved medication, although guidelines suggest that methylphenidate rather than amphetamines may be helpful if behavioral interventions prove insufficient. Alpha agonists (clonidine and guanfacine) and the selective norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor, atomoxetine, are the other FDA-approved options for treating ADHD. There are newer FDA-approved medications for ADHD treatment, including Jornay (methylphenidate extended-release) which is taken at night and starts the medication effect the next morning, Xelstrym (dextroamphetamine) which is an amphetamine patch, Qelbree (viloxazine) which is a non-stimulant, Adhansia (methylphenidate hydrochloride), Dyanavel (amphetamine extended-release oral suspension), Mydayis (mixed salts amphetamine product), and Cotempla (methylphenidate extended-release orally disintegrating tablets). Many children and families can alternate between various medication options depending on the efficacy of treatment and tolerability of the medication. The goal of treatment is to improve symptoms to restore functioning at home and at school. ADHD and School-Aged Children Teachers and school staff can provide parents and doctors with information to help evaluate behavior and learning problems and can assist with behavioral training. However, school staff cannot diagnose ADHD, make decisions about treatment or require that a student take medication to attend school. Only parents and guardians can make those decisions with the child’s health care clinician. Students whose ADHD impairs their learning may qualify for special education under the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act or for a Section 504 plan (for children who do not require special education) under the Rehabilitation Act of 1973. Children with ADHD can benefit from study skills instruction, changes to the classroom setup, alternative teaching techniques and a modified curriculum. ADHD and Adults Many children diagnosed with ADHD will continue to meet criteria for the disorder later in life and may show impairments requiring ongoing treatment (Pliszka, 2007). However, sometimes a diagnosis of ADHD is missed during childhood. Many adults with ADHD do not realize they have the disorder. A comprehensive evaluation typically includes a review of past and current symptoms, a medical exam and history, and use of adult rating scales or checklists. Adults with ADHD are treated with medication, psychotherapy or a combination. Behavior management strategies, such as ways to minimize distractions and increase structure and organization, and support from immediate family members can also be helpful. ADHD is a protected disability under the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 and the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). This means that institutions receiving federal funding cannot discriminate against those with disabilities. Individuals whose symptoms of ADHD cause impairment in the work setting may qualify for reasonable work accommodations under ADA. Related Conditions Autism spectrum disorder Disruptive, impulse control and conduct disorders Social communication disorder Specific learning disorder References American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM-5). 2013. Austerman J. ADHD and behavioral disorders: Assessment, management, and an update from DSM-5. Cleve Clin J Med. 2015 Nov;82(11 Suppl 1):S2-7. Beaton, D. M., Sirois, F., & Milne, E. (2022). Experiences of criticism in adults with ADHD: A qualitative study. PloS one, e0263366. Danielson, M.L., et al.Prevalence of Parent-Reported ADHD Diagnosis and Associated Treatment Among U.S. Children and Adolescents, 2016. Journal of Clinical Child & Adolescent Psychology, Volume 47, 2018 - Issue 2. Harpin VA. (2005). The effect of ADHD on the life of an individual, their family, and community from preschool to adult life. Arch Dis Child. 90 Suppl 1(Suppl 1):i2-7. Harpin V, Mazzone L, Raynaud JP, Kahle J, Hodgkins P. (2013). Long-Term Outcomes of ADHD: A Systematic Review of Self-Esteem and Social Function. J Atten Disord. 20(4):295-305. Pliszka S; AACAP Work Group on Quality Issues. Practice parameter for the assessment and treatment of children and adolescents with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2007 Jul;46(7):894-921. Simon, V. , Czobor, P. , Bálint, S. , et al: :Prevalence and correlates of adult attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder: a meta-analysis. Br J Psychiatry194(3):204–211, 2009 Tripp, G., Wickens, J.R. Neurobiology of ADHD. Neuropharmacology. 2009 Dec;57(7-8):579-89. Wolraich, M.L., Hagan, J.F.J., Allan, C., et al. Clinical Practice Guideline for the Diagnosis, Evaluation, and Treatment of Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder in Children and Adolescents. Pediatrics. 2019;144(4). Physician Review Rana Elmaghraby, M.D. Stephanie Garayalde, M.D. June 2022 Other resources More on ADHD Children and Adults with ADHD (CHADD): Online ADHD Training for Parents Parent's Medication Guide: ADHD – from APA and AACAP (.pdf) National Institutes on Mental Health (NIMH) - ADHD Attention Deficit Disorder Association (ADDA) ADDitude Magazine - Directory of parent support American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry (AACAP) Medical leadership for mind, brain and body. Join Today Explore APA Toggle List Psychiatrists Residents & Medical Students Patients & Families About APA Work At APA Annual Meeting Newsroom Toggle List News Releases Psychiatric News Message from President APA Blogs Join APA Toggle List General Members Early Career Psychiatrists Residents & Fellows Medical Students International International Resident-Fellows Semi-Retired & Retired APA Sites Toggle List APA Annual Meeting APA Communities APA Foundation APA JobCentral APA Learning Center APA Publishing Center for Workplace Mental Health Melvin Sabshin, M.D. Library & Archives Psychiatric News Psychiatry Online Terms of Use and Privacy Policy Copyright Contact Conflict of Interest Policy Accessibility © 2024 American Psychiatric Association. All Rights Reserved 800 Maine Avenue, S.W., Suite 900, Washington, DC 20024 202-559-3900 [email protected] Mobile menu Close menu Home Psychiatrists Residents & Medical Students Patients and Families Membership About APA Newsroom Advocacy & APAPAC APA Sites RENEW JOIN Sign In Back Psychiatrists Education Practice Diversity & Health Equity Research & Registry Advocacy & APAPAC Meetings & Events Search Directories & Databases International Back Residents & Medical Students Residents Medical Students Back Patients and Families What is Psychiatry? Find a Psychiatrist Addiction and Substance Use Disorders Dementia and Alzheimer's Disease Alcohol Use Disorder Anxiety Disorders Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) Autism Spectrum Disorder Bipolar Disorders Climate Change and Mental Health Connections Coping After Disaster Depression Disruptive, Impulse-Control and Conduct Disorders Dissociative Disorders Domestic Violence Eating Disorders E-Cigarettes and Vaping Gambling Disorder Gender Dysphoria Helping a Loved One Cope with Mental Illness Hoarding Disorder Integrated Behavioral Healthcare Intellectual Disability Internet Gaming Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder Opioid Use Disorder Perinatal Depression (formerly Postpartum) Personality Disorders Posttraumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) Prolonged Grief Disorder Schizophrenia Seasonal Affective Disorder (SAD) Sleep Disorders Somatic Symptom Disorder Specific Learning Disorders Stigma, Prejudice and Discrimination Against People with Mental Illness Suicide Prevention Technology Addictions: Social Media, Online Gaming, and More Warning Signs of Mental Illness Electroconvulsive Therapy (ECT) What is Mental Illness? What is Psychotherapy? What is Telepsychiatry? La Salud Mental Childhood Disorders: Medication Guides for Parents Lifestyle to Support Mental Health Back Membership Join APA Member Benefits Honorary Fellowship (FAPA & DFAPA) Awards & Leadership Opportunities Get Involved Directories, Contact Info & FAQs District Branches Back About APA APA's Vision, Mission, Values, and Goals Meet Our Organization Read APA Organization Documents and Policies Work At APA About APA's Headquarters Policy Finder Contact Us Back Newsroom News Releases Messages from the APA President Reporting on Mental Health Conditions APA Blogs Goldwater Rule Annual Meeting Press Registration + Guidelines APA Public Opinion Polls Reporter Toolkit: Recommendations on Covering the AAPI Community Comunicados de prensa en español Back APA Sites APA Annual Meeting APA Communities APA Foundation APA JobCentral APA Learning Center APA Publishing Center for Workplace Mental Health Melvin Sabshin, M.D. Library & Archives Psychiatric News Psychiatry Online Back Education Annual Meeting APA Learning Center APA On Demand At the APA Educational Series Books and Journals Certification and Licensure Diversity and Health Equity Education Resources Meeting Submission and Guidelines Mental Health Innovation Zone Podcasts The Mental Health Services Conference The Virtual Immersive Virtual Paid Courses Back Practice Clinical Practice Guidelines Covid-19 / Coronavirus Digital Mental Health DSM Ethics Helping Patients Access Care Media and Communications Mental Health Apps Mental Health Parity Practice Management Professional Interests Quality Improvement Risk Management Social Media Sunshine Act Telepsychiatry The Clozapine Risk Evaluation and Mitigation Strategy (REMS) Program Transition to Practice and Early Career Resources Well-being and Burnout Back Diversity & Health Equity Advocacy Education Governance Mental Health and Faith Community Partnership Mental Health Equity Looking Beyond Series Minority and Underrepresented (M/UR) Caucuses Moore Equity in Mental Health Initiative News and Updates Striving for Excellence Series Workforce Back Research & Registry AMNet: Addiction Medicine Practice Based Research Network DMS-5-TR PsychPRO: APA's Mental Health Registry Research Colloquium for Junior Psychiatrist Investigators Perinatal Mental Health Toolkit Psychiatric Bed Crisis Report Back Advocacy & APAPAC Advocacy Action Center APAPAC Congressional Advocacy Network Election Resource Center Federal Affairs State Affairs Implementing 9-8-8 Advocacy Update Webinars Back Meetings & Events 2025 Annual Meeting The 2024 Mental Health Services Conference Addressing Structural Racism Town Hall Series APA Meetings App Governance Meetings Mental Health Equity Fireside Chat Series Moore Equity in Mental Health 5K Policy & Practice Insights Series September Component Meetings Social Determinants of Mental Health Town Hall Series Back Search Directories & Databases Amicus Briefs APA Communities Assembly Directory Component Directory Conference Publications Library and Archive Member Directory Member Obituaries Policy Finder Practice Guidelines Resource Documents Back International International Trainees International Humanitarian Opportunities Global Mental Health International Medical Graduates Resources Back Residents 100% Club Residents' Journal Featured Publications APA/APAF Fellowships External Fellowships and Awards Helping Residents Cope with a Patient Suicide International Medical Graduates Resources MindGames Vacant Resident Positions Leadership Positions SET for Success Back Medical Students Apply for Psychiatric Residency Choosing a Career in Psychiatry Building a Career in Psychiatry Medical Student Programs PsychSIGN Resident-Fellow Census Transitioning to Residency During COVID-19 Back Addiction and Substance Use Disorders What Is a Substance Use Disorder? Expert Q&A: Addiction and Substance Use Disorders Back Dementia and Alzheimer's Disease What Are Dementia and Alzheimer’s Disease? Expert Q&A: Dementia and Alzheimer's Disease Back Anxiety Disorders What are Anxiety Disorders? Expert Q&A: Anxiety Disorders Back Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) What is ADHD? Expert Q&A: ADHD Back Autism Spectrum Disorder What Is Autism Spectrum Disorder? Expert Q&A: Autism Spectrum Disorder Back Bipolar Disorders What Are Bipolar Disorders? Expert Q&A: Bipolar Disorder Back Climate Change and Mental Health Connections How Extreme Weather Events Affect Mental Health Who Is Affected by Climate Change? Back Depression What Is Depression? Expert Q&A: Depression Back Disruptive, Impulse-Control and Conduct Disorders What are Disruptive, Impulse Control and Conduct Disorders? Expert Q&A: Disruptive, Impulse Control and Conduct Disorders Back Dissociative Disorders What Are Dissociative Disorders? Expert Q&A: Dissociative Disorders Back Eating Disorders What are Eating Disorders? Expert Q&A: Eating Disorders Back Gambling Disorder What is Gambling Disorder? Expert Q&A: Gambling Disorder Back Gender Dysphoria What is Gender Dysphoria? Expert Q&A: Gender Dysphoria Back Hoarding Disorder What is Hoarding Disorder? Expert Q&A: Hoarding Disorder Back Intellectual Disability What is Intellectual Disability? Expert Q&A: Intellectual Disability Back Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder What Is Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder? Expert Q&A: Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder Back Perinatal Depression (formerly Postpartum) What is Perinatal Depression (formerly Postpartum)? Expert Q&A: Perinatal Depression Back Personality Disorders What are Personality Disorders? Expert Q&A: Personality Disorders Back Posttraumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) What is Posttraumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD)? Expert Q&A: Posttraumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) Back Schizophrenia What is Schizophrenia? Expert Q&A: Schizophrenia Back Sleep Disorders What are Sleep Disorders? Expert Q&A: Sleep Disorders Back Somatic Symptom Disorder What is Somatic Symptom Disorder? Expert Q&A: Somatic Symptom Disorder Back Specific Learning Disorders What Are Specific Learning Disorders? Expert Q&A: Specific Learning Disorders Back Technology Addictions: Social Media, Online Gaming, and More What is Technology Addiction? Expert Q&A: Technology Addiction Back La Salud Mental Cigarrillos electrónicos y vapeo Trastorno del espectro autista Trastorno por consumo de alcohol Trastorno por consumo de opioides Trastorno de estrés postraumático (TEPT) Comunicados de prensa en español Adicción a la tecnología: redes sociales, juegos en línea, y más ¿Qué es la psiquiatría? Conexiones entre el cambio climático y la salud mental Ansiedad Más temas de salud mental Back Join APA General Members Early Career Psychiatrists Residents and Fellows Medical Students International International Resident-Fellows Semi-Retired and Retired View Your Profile Back Member Benefits General Members Early Career Psychiatrists Resident-Fellow Members Medical Students International International Resident-Fellows Semi-Retired and Retired Back Honorary Fellowship (FAPA & DFAPA) Fellow of the APA Distinguished Fellow of the APA International Fellow of the APA International Distinguished Fellow of the APA 2024 Class of Honorary Fellows Back Awards & Leadership Opportunities Awards 2025 APA National Elections Councils, Committees and Components Resident-Fellow Leadership Opportunities Back Get Involved Advocacy and APAPAC APA/APAF Fellowships APA Insider Sessions APA Specialty Interest Caucuses, Listservs & Communities Leadership, Equity and Diversity Institute Medical Student Programs Mentorship Program for APA/APAF Fellows Minority and Underrepresented (M/UR) Caucuses Research Colloquium Back Directories, Contact Info & FAQs Contact Your Membership Specialist Contact Your District Branch Membership FAQs Semi-Retired and Retired FAQs Lump Sum Dues Member Directory Assembly Directory Component Directory Back District Branches District Branch Resources District Branch Dues for General Members District Branch Dues for Residents and Fellows

--------------------------------------------------

