URL: https://www.britannica.com/biography/Katherine-Johnson-mathematician
Content length: 10363
Content:
Katherine Johnson | Biography, Education, Accomplishments, & Facts | Britannica Search Britannica Click here to search Search Britannica Click here to search Subscribe Subscribe Login Home History & Society Science & Tech Biographies Animals & Nature Geography & Travel Arts & Culture Money Games & Quizzes Videos On This Day One Good Fact Dictionary New Articles History & Society Lifestyles & Social Issues Philosophy & Religion Politics, Law & Government World History Science & Tech Health & Medicine Science Technology Biographies Browse Biographies Animals & Nature Birds, Reptiles & Other Vertebrates Bugs, Mollusks & Other Invertebrates Environment Fossils & Geologic Time Mammals Plants Geography & Travel Geography & Travel Arts & Culture Entertainment & Pop Culture Literature Sports & Recreation Visual Arts Companions Demystified Image Galleries Infographics Lists Podcasts Spotlight Summaries The Forum Top Questions #WTFact 100 Women Britannica Kids Saving Earth Space Next 50 Student Center Ask the Chatbot Games & Quizzes History & Society Science & Tech Biographies Animals & Nature Geography & Travel Arts & Culture Money Videos Katherine Johnson Table of Contents Introduction & Top Questions References & Edit History Quick Facts & Related Topics Images Quizzes Numbers and Mathematics Related Questions How did Katherine Johnson inspire other women? When was Apollo 11 launched? Read Next Timeline of the 1980s Timeline of the Space Race, 1957–69 What Have We Left on the Moon? Unusual Counting Systems Is Zero an Even or an Odd Number? Discover Olympics: Artistic Gymnastics Did Marie-Antoinette Really Say “Let Them Eat Cake”? Periods of American Literature 8 Olympic Cheating Scandals How Is Diving Scored? New Seven Wonders of the World 10 Best Hockey Players of All Time Contents Science Mathematics Katherine Johnson American mathematician Actions Cite verifiedCite While every effort has been made to follow citation style rules, there may be some discrepancies. Please refer to the appropriate style manual or other sources if you have any questions. Select Citation Style MLA APA Chicago Manual of Style Copy Citation Share Share Share to social media Facebook X URL https://www.britannica.com/biography/Katherine-Johnson-mathematician Give Feedback External Websites Feedback Corrections? Updates? Omissions? Let us know if you have suggestions to improve this article (requires login). Feedback Type Select a type (Required) Factual Correction Spelling/Grammar Correction Link Correction Additional Information Other Your Feedback Submit Feedback Thank you for your feedback Our editors will review what you’ve submitted and determine whether to revise the article. External Websites The HistoryMakers - Biography of Katherine G. Johnson NASA - Biography of Katherine Johnson Engineering and Technology History Wiki - Biography of Katherine Johnson Space.com - Katherine Johnson: Pioneering NASA mathematician The West Virginia Encyclopedia - Katherine Johnson Women and the American Story - Life Story: Katherine Johnson (1918–2020) West Virginia State University - Katherine Johnson Official Site of the Katherine Johnson Foundation Britannica Websites Articles from Britannica Encyclopedias for elementary and high school students. Katherine Johnson - Children's Encyclopedia (Ages 8-11) Katherine Johnson - Student Encyclopedia (Ages 11 and up) Print Cite verifiedCite While every effort has been made to follow citation style rules, there may be some discrepancies. Please refer to the appropriate style manual or other sources if you have any questions. Select Citation Style MLA APA Chicago Manual of Style Copy Citation Share Share Share to social media Facebook X URL https://www.britannica.com/biography/Katherine-Johnson-mathematician Feedback External Websites Feedback Corrections? Updates? Omissions? Let us know if you have suggestions to improve this article (requires login). Feedback Type Select a type (Required) Factual Correction Spelling/Grammar Correction Link Correction Additional Information Other Your Feedback Submit Feedback Thank you for your feedback Our editors will review what you’ve submitted and determine whether to revise the article. External Websites The HistoryMakers - Biography of Katherine G. Johnson NASA - Biography of Katherine Johnson Engineering and Technology History Wiki - Biography of Katherine Johnson Space.com - Katherine Johnson: Pioneering NASA mathematician The West Virginia Encyclopedia - Katherine Johnson Women and the American Story - Life Story: Katherine Johnson (1918–2020) West Virginia State University - Katherine Johnson Official Site of the Katherine Johnson Foundation Britannica Websites Articles from Britannica Encyclopedias for elementary and high school students. Katherine Johnson - Children's Encyclopedia (Ages 8-11) Katherine Johnson - Student Encyclopedia (Ages 11 and up) Also known as: Katherine Coleman, Katherine Goble Written and fact-checked by The Editors of Encyclopaedia Britannica Encyclopaedia Britannica's editors oversee subject areas in which they have extensive knowledge, whether from years of experience gained by working on that content or via study for an advanced degree. They write new content and verify and edit content received from contributors. The Editors of Encyclopaedia Britannica Last Updated: Aug 1, 2024 • Article History Table of Contents Katherine Johnson See all media Née: Katherine Coleman (Show more) Also known as (1939–56): Katherine Goble (Show more) Born: August 26, 1918, White Sulphur Springs, West Virginia, U.S. (Show more) Died: February 24, 2020, Newport News, Virginia (aged 101) (Show more) Awards And Honors: Presidential Medal of Freedom (2015) (Show more) Role In: Apollo 11 (Show more) See all related content → Ask the Chatbot a Question Ask the Chatbot a Question Top Questions How was Katherine Johnson influential? Katherine Johnson’s knowledge of mathematics was instrumental in the return of the Apollo astronauts from the Moon to Earth.How did Katherine Johnson inspire other women? In 1939 Johnson was selected to be one of the first three African American students to enroll in a graduate program at West Virginia University. Later she was a member of a group of NASA employees called "computers," made up of African American women who excelled in mathematics and problem-solving.What was Katherine Johnson’s maiden name?Katherine Johnson’s maiden name was Coleman. From 1939 to 1956 she was Katherine Goble, having married James Goble. Three years after his death, she married James Johnson.Katherine Johnson (born August 26, 1918, White Sulphur Springs, West Virginia, U.S.—died February 24, 2020, Newport News, Virginia) was an American mathematician who calculated and analyzed the flight paths of many spacecraft during her more than three decades with the U.S. space program. Her work helped send astronauts to the Moon. Coleman’s intelligence and skill with numbers became apparent when she was a child; by the time she was 10 years old, she had started attending high school. In 1937, at age 18, Coleman graduated with highest honours from West Virginia State College (now West Virginia State University), earning bachelor’s degrees in mathematics and French. She subsequently moved to Virginia to take a teaching job. In 1939, however, she was selected to be one of the first three African American students to enroll in a graduate program at West Virginia University. She studied math there but soon left after marrying James Goble and deciding to start a family. He died in 1956, and three years later she married James Johnson. Britannica Quiz Numbers and Mathematics In 1953 she began working at the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA)’s West Area Computing unit, a group of African American women who manually performed complex mathematical calculations for the program’s engineers. The women, known as the West Computers, analyzed test data and provided mathematical computations that were essential to the success of the early U.S. space program. During this time, NACA was segregated, and the West Computers had to use separate bathrooms and dining facilities. That changed in 1958 when NACA was incorporated into the newly formed National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), which banned segregation.Katherine JohnsonKatherine Johnson, mid-1960s.(more)At NASA Johnson was a member of the Space Task Group. In 1960 she coauthored a paper with one of the group’s engineers about calculations for placing a spacecraft into orbit. It was the first time a woman in her division received credit as an author of a research report. Johnson authored or coauthored 26 research reports during her career.Katherine JohnsonKatherine Johnson, 1966.(more) Johnson also played an important role in NASA’s Mercury program (1961–63) of crewed spaceflights. In 1961 she calculated the path for Freedom 7, the spacecraft that put the first U.S astronaut in space, Alan B. Shepard, Jr. The following year, at the request of John Glenn, Johnson verified that the electronic computer had planned his flight correctly. Glenn subsequently made history aboard Friendship 7, becoming the first U.S. astronaut to orbit Earth. Johnson was also part of the team that calculated where and when to launch the rocket for the Apollo 11 mission of 1969, which sent the first three men to the Moon. Johnson later worked on the space shuttle program. She retired from NASA in 1986. Katherine Johnson after receiving the Presidential Medal of FreedomKatherine Johnson after receiving the Presidential Medal of Freedom, 2015.(more)Johnson received numerous awards and honours for her work, including the Presidential Medal of Freedom (2015). In 2016 NASA named a building, the Katherine G. Johnson Computational Research Facility, after her. That year Margot Lee Shetterly published Hidden Figures: The American Dream and the Untold Story of the Black Women Mathematicians Who Helped Win the Space Race, about the West Computers, including Johnson, Dorothy Vaughan, and Mary Jackson. A film based on the book was also released in 2016. Johnson’s memoir, My Remarkable Journey (2021; written with Joylette Hylick and Katherine Moore), was published posthumously. The Editors of Encyclopaedia BritannicaThis article was most recently revised and updated by Encyclopaedia Britannica.

--------------------------------------------------

