URL: https://www.bhf.org.uk/informationsupport/risk-factors/high-blood-pressure
Content length: 17006
Content:
High blood pressure (Hypertension) - BHF Skip to main content Who we are Learn CPR Store finder Search Close Popular across the BHF How to do CPR Get your free Gifts in Wills guide Cost of living Recipes Information and support Information and support Conditions Risk factors Support Tests Treatments CPR and defibrillators: How to save a life How your heart works For professionals Health at work Heart Matters How you can help How you can help Volunteer Donate Fundraise Take part in an event Partner with us London to Brighton Bike Ride Sunday 15 June 2025 is our next London to Brighton Bike Ride. Sign up now! Volunteer in our shops A great way to meet new people and share your skills – we'd love for you to join our team Shop Shop Buy furniture and items for your home Our eBay shop BHF gifts and merchandise Defibrillator shop Donate your items Book a house clearance Find your local shop Volunteer in our shops What we do What we do Who we are Our research Our strategy News from BHF Jobs at BHF Find BHF near you Find your nearest BHF shop, and book and clothing bank Our research: Heart statistics Read the most comprehensive statistics on the effects, prevention, treatment, and costs of heart and circulatory diseases in the UK Donate Donate Donate items Donate money Leave a gift in your Will Lottery Donate items We pick up furniture and electrical items from your home for free. The items you donate are sold in our stores to help fund our lifesaving research Donate money BHF funds the science that saves lives. Your donation helps us discover new ways to beat heart diseases Search Sign in/Register Menu Information and support How you can help Shop What we do Back Information and support Conditions Risk factors Support Tests Treatments CPR and defibrillators: How to save a life How your heart works For professionals Health at work Heart Matters Back How you can help Volunteer Donate Fundraise Take part in an event Partner with us London to Brighton Bike Ride Sunday 15 June 2025 is our next London to Brighton Bike Ride. Sign up now! Volunteer in our shops A great way to meet new people and share your skills – we'd love for you to join our team Back Shop Buy furniture and items for your home Our eBay shop BHF gifts and merchandise Defibrillator shop Donate your items Book a house clearance Find your local shop Volunteer in our shops Back What we do Who we are Our research Our strategy News from BHF Jobs at BHF Find BHF near you Find your nearest BHF shop, and book and clothing bank Our research: Heart statistics Read the most comprehensive statistics on the effects, prevention, treatment, and costs of heart and circulatory diseases in the UK Back Donate Donate items Donate money Leave a gift in your Will Lottery Donate items We pick up furniture and electrical items from your home for free. The items you donate are sold in our stores to help fund our lifesaving research Donate money BHF funds the science that saves lives. Your donation helps us discover new ways to beat heart diseases Close Home Information and support Risk factors High blood pressure High blood pressure (hypertension) is very common. Although it doesn’t often come with symptoms, knowing you have high blood pressure could prevent life-threatening complications like heart attack and stroke. We also have this information available in Bengali, Polish, Punjabi, Romanian and Urdu. What's on this page? Blood pressure and hypertension explained Risks of high blood pressure Causes of high blood pressure Symptoms of high blood pressure Where to measure or check your blood pressure How to measure or check your blood pressure Diagnosing high blood pressure Blood pressure readings Treating high blood pressure When you should check your blood pressure Help and support Listen to this information You can listen to an audio version of this information: Your browser does not support the audio element. With the help of our cardiac nurses, we created this audio using our voices and an AI tool. For more information on how we use AI at the BHF, get in touch. Blood pressure and hypertension explained Blood pressure is the pressure of blood in your arteries. Your arteries are the vessels (tubes) that carry blood from your heart to your brain and the rest of your body. You need a certain amount of pressure to get the blood moving around your body. Your blood pressure naturally goes up and down throughout the day and night, and it’s normal for it to go up while you’re moving about. It’s when your overall blood pressure is always high, even when you are resting, that you need to do something about it. Blood pressure is measured using two numbers: Systolic pressure: this is the higher of the two numbers. It’s the pressure against your arteries when your heart is pumping blood around your body. Diastolic pressure: this is the lower of the two numbers. It shows how much pressure is in your arteries when your heart relaxes between beats. Learn what normal blood pressure readings look like. The medical term for high blood pressure is ‘hypertension’, and it means your blood pressure is always too high. This means your heart is working harder when pumping blood around your body. Risks of high blood pressure High blood pressure is a serious condition. Your arteries are normally stretchy, so they can cope with your blood pressure going up and down. But with high blood pressure, your arteries lose their stretchiness, becoming stiff or narrow. This narrowing makes it easier for fatty material (atheroma) to build up. This narrowing and damage to the arteries lining your heart or brain could trigger a life-threatening heart attack or stroke. If left untreated, high blood pressure can also lead to complications such as: kidney failure heart failure problems with your sight vascular dementia. Learn more about how high blood pressure is treated. We’re here for you with information and support Our fortnightly Heart Matters newsletter includes the latest updates about medications and treatments, as well as support for healthy eating, staying active and your emotional wellbeing. I’d like to sign up Causes of high blood pressure In most cases, there isn't a specific reason for the cause of high blood pressure, but most people develop it because of their diet, lifestyle or medical condition. You might be more at risk if you: are over the age of 65 have someone in your family with high blood pressure are someone who smokes drink too much alcohol eat too much salt and not enough fruit and vegetables don't get enough exercise are overweight, especially around your mid-section. People living in deprived areas are also at higher risk of having high blood pressure, as well as people who are of black African or black Caribbean descent. Changes in your diet and increasing activity levels will help improve your blood pressure. For some people, a cause of high blood pressure is found. This is known as ‘secondary hypertension’. Examples of secondary hypertension include: kidney disease diabetes a condition called obstructive sleep apnoea, which can lead to disturbed sleep some medicines, such as oral contraceptives some over-the-counter and herbal medicines. If you are worried that any medicine or remedy might affect your blood pressure, ask your doctor or pharmacist about it. Visit the NHS website for more information about the causes of secondary hypertension. Can pregnancy lead to high blood pressure? Around one in ten women develop high blood pressure during pregnancy. This increases the risk of long-term high blood pressure. Research funded by the BHF found that lowering the blood pressure of birth mothers within six weeks of giving birth reduced their long-term risk. Read about hypertension during pregnancy Symptoms of high blood pressure Most people don't know they have high blood pressure because there aren't obvious symptoms. That's why it's so important to get your blood pressure checked regularly. Rarely, it can cause symptoms like blurred vision, headaches and nosebleeds. Find out more about the symptoms of high blood pressure. Where to measure or check your blood pressure As many as 5 million adults in the UK have undiagnosed high blood pressure and don’t know they are at risk. The only way to know whether you have high blood pressure is to have it measured. You can get your blood pressure checked at: GP surgeries some pharmacies some workplaces. If you’re a healthy adult aged 40 to 74, and live in England or Wales, you’ll be invited to a free NHS Health Check every 5 years, which will include a blood pressure check. You can also check your blood pressure at home. In England, a scheme called Blood Pressure @home is in place to support people with this, which you can ask your GP about. There is also a similar scheme in Scotland called the Scale-Up BP initiative. How to measure or check your blood pressure Your blood pressure is usually measured using a blood pressure monitor. This is usually an electronic monitor connected to an inflatable cuff, which is wrapped around your upper arm. When you have your blood pressure measured, the reading is written as two numbers. The first is when the pressure is at its highest (or systolic pressure), and the second at its lowest (or diastolic pressure). For example, your reading might be something like 140/90 mmHg, which you would say as “140 over 90” (mmHg is a unit for measuring blood pressure). Diagnosing high blood pressure Your blood pressure will usually need to be checked more than once to confirm a diagnosis of high blood pressure. This is because blood pressure can go up and down a lot during the day. When people have their blood pressure checked in the clinic it can be higher than expected, especially if they feel nervous or anxious. If your blood pressure is high in the clinic, you might be advised to: Take additional readings at home using a 24-hour monitor that checks your blood pressure throughout the day (called ambulatory blood pressure monitoring, or ABPM). Record additional readings at home using your own blood pressure monitor (called home blood pressure monitoring, or HBPM). You can also ask your GP practice if they are part of any schemes where you can loan a blood pressure monitor from them. If you’ve been asked to monitor your blood pressure at home, your GP will ask you to check your blood pressure over several days. This can include taking a series of recordings (at least two), twice a day, in the morning and evening. By looking at all your blood pressure readings over a few days, your GP can work out what your 'average’ blood pressure is. In some cases, your GP might want to run other tests as well. For instance, they might want to do blood tests to check your cholesterol levels and kidney function, or check your heart rhythm with a test called an electrocardiogram (ECG). Buy your own blood pressure monitor To help you check your blood pressure at home easily, you can look at approved blood pressure monitors in our online shop. You can also find out how to choose a reliable blood pressure monitor first. Buy a blood pressure monitor Blood pressure readings Healthy or normal blood pressure There are two categories of normal blood pressure: Normal blood pressure is usually considered to be between 90/60 mmHg and 120/80 mmHg. For over-80s, because it’s normal for arteries to get stiffer as we get older, the ideal blood pressure is under 150/90 mmHg (or 145/85 mmHg at home). High-normal blood pressure, sometimes called ‘pre-hypertension’, is when you don’t have an ideal blood pressure but you also don’t have high blood pressure. It’s usually considered to be between 120/80 mmHg and 140/90 mmHg. Being at this level might prompt you to live a healthier lifestyle so you don’t develop high blood pressure. The NHS has a handy tool to show where your blood pressure is on a chart. High blood pressure There are three different stages of high blood pressure: Stage one: this is when your blood pressure is between 140/90 mmHg and 160/100 mmHg in the clinic, or 135/85 mmHg to 150/95 mmHg at home. Stage two: this is when your blood pressure is between 160/100 mmHg and 180/120 mmHg in the clinic, or over 150/95 mmHg at home. Stage three: this is when your systolic blood pressure is over 180 mmHg or your diastolic blood pressure is over 120 mmHg in the clinic. This stage is also called ‘severe hypertension’, and your GP will need to assess you urgently for further investigations. Discuss your readings with your healthcare team and ask any questions you have. Together, you might want to set a target blood pressure that’s right for you and your health goals. Treating high blood pressure How your high blood pressure is managed depends on a range of things, such as your health goals and the stage of your condition. The healthcare team at your GP practice will help you create a plan to reduce your blood pressure. By making lifestyle changes, you can lower your blood pressure and keep it at a healthy level. Recent evidence shows that tackling obesity and staying active are especially important. You'll feel the benefits right away with improved sleep, more energy, and a better mood. This useful tool developed by the NHS helps you make a plan that you can discuss with your GP. If your blood pressure is high or very high, your GP will usually offer you medicines on top of lifestyle changes. Find out more about medications and treatment for high blood pressure. How to manage your blood pressure at home We've worked with BHF nurses to make it easier to measure and manage your blood pressure at home by pulling all the information you'll need together in one simple place: Manage your blood pressure at home When you should check your blood pressure If you’re a healthy adult aged 40 to 74, it’s a good idea to get your blood pressure checked every five years (during an NHS Health Check if in England or Wales). If you’re near the threshold for high blood pressure, your healthcare team may ask to monitor you more often. If your blood pressure is well controlled, you’ll normally be monitored yearly, along with reviewing any medication you take. When you start new medications or have dose changes to existing ones, your blood pressure will need to be checked more than once a year. Check with your healthcare team how often to measure your blood pressure at home if you have your own monitor. Try keeping a diary of your readings – this will help your healthcare team spot patterns, and it might be motivating to see how your blood pressure improve over time. Help and support Get in touch with our expert cardiac nurses through our Heart Helpline, which is open Monday to Friday, 9am to 5pm. They can give you information and support about heart and circulatory diseases, as well as their risk factors. If you have high blood pressure, it's important to know that you're not alone. It’s a good idea to find support from the people around you and healthcare professionals. For example, our HealthUnlocked community is a free online space where you can connect with others affected by heart and circulatory disease. Read our 6 top tips for reducing your blood pressure if you’ve been diagnosed with hypertension. Read more High blood pressure in BSL Low blood pressure Symptoms and treatment Know your risk Keep your heart healthy (Braille version) Did you find this page useful? Help us do more Your donation will help us provide essential information and support. Thank you ❤️ Other amount To add a donation select or enter your preferred amount More information High blood pressure - symptoms and treatment Many people with high blood pressure feel fine, so it’s important to get your blood pressure checked regularly. Stroke - causes, signs and symptoms Discover the causes and symptoms of a stroke, which occurs when the blood supply to part of your brain is cut off, causing brain damage. Heart attack Learn about the causes of a heart attack, how a heart attack is diagnosed, treated and how to take care of yourself at home and in the hospital. You can trust our health information We've followed an eight-step process to make sure this content is reliable, accurate and trustworthy. Learn how we make our health information reliable and easy to understand. Page last updated: March 2023 Next update due: March 2026 Share British Heart Foundation Get in touch Contact us or get help Customer services: 0300 330 3322 Phone lines are open Mon - Fri 9am-5pm Nurse Helpline Work for us Jobs Volunteer Your BHF Online community Sign in/register Get our email newsletter Find the BHF near you Our policies Privacy Cookies Terms & conditions Accessibility Executive pay Modern slavery statement All policies Cookie settings Follow us British Heart Foundation is a registered Charity No. 225971. Registered as a Company limited by guarantee in England & Wales No. 699547. Registered office at Greater London House, 180 Hampstead Road, London NW1 7AW. Registered as a Charity in Scotland No. SC039426

--------------------------------------------------

