URL: https://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/topics/attention-deficit-hyperactivity-disorder-adhd
Content length: 25880
Content:
Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder - National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) Skip to main content Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses. Search the NIMH Website: Información en español Celebrating 75 Years! Learn More >> Main navigation Mental Health Information Get Involved Research Funding News & Events About Us Health Topics NIMH offers expert-reviewed information on mental disorders and a range of topics. Statistics NIMH statistics pages include statistics on the prevalence, treatment, and costs of mental illness for the population of the United States. Brochures and Fact Sheets Download, read, and order free NIMH brochures and fact sheets about mental disorders and related topics. Help for Mental Illnesses If you or someone you know has a mental illness, there are ways to get help. Use these resources to find help for yourself, a friend, or a family member. Clinical Trials If you or a friend or family member are thinking about taking part in clinical research, this page contains basic information about clinical trials. Stakeholder Engagement Find out how NIMH engages a range of stakeholder organizations as part of its efforts to ensure the greatest public health impact of the research we support. Connect with NIMH Learn more about NIMH newsletters, public participation in grant reviews, research funding, clinical trials, the NIMH Gift Fund, and connecting with NIMH on social media. Digital Shareables Use these free education and outreach materials in your community and on social media to spread the word about mental health and related topics. Science Education Use these free digital, outreach materials in your community and on social media to spread the word about mental health. Upcoming Observances and Related Events Get Involved observances calendar Research Funded by NIMH NIMH supports research at universities, medical centers, and other institutions via grants, contracts, and cooperative agreements. Learn more about NIMH research areas, policies, resources, and initiatives. Research Conducted at NIMH (Intramural Research Program) The Division of Intramural Research Programs (IRP) is the internal research division of the NIMH. Over 40 research groups conduct basic neuroscience research and clinical investigations of mental illnesses, brain function, and behavior at the NIH campus in Bethesda, Maryland. Learn more about research conducted at NIMH. Priority Research Areas Learn about NIMH priority areas for research and funding that have the potential to improve mental health care over the short, medium, and long term. Resources for Researchers Information about resources such as data, tissue, model organisms and imaging resources to support the NIMH research community. Opportunities & Announcements Find all NIMH and cross-NIH funding opportunities. Funding Strategy for Grants Read more about the NIMH Strategic Plan for Research, Strategic Research Priorities, the anatomy of NIMH funding, and our yearly funding strategy for research grants. Application Process Explore the NIMH grant application process, including how to write your grant, how to submit your grant, and how the review process works. Managing Grants Learn about how NIMH manages research grants, including policies and reporting requirements. Clinical Research Find the latest NIH and NIMH policies, guidance, and resources for clinical research. Training Explore NIMH research training and career development opportunities. Small Business Research Learn about funding opportunities for small businesses. Quick Links Funding & Grant News Support for Clinical Trials at NIMH Science News List of NIMH science news including press releases, science updates and institute announcements. Meetings and Events Details about upcoming events—including meetings, conferences, workshops, lectures, webinars, and chats—sponsored by NIMH. Multimedia NIMH videos and podcasts featuring science news, lecture series, meetings, seminars, and special events. Social Media The latest information and resources on mental disorders shared on X, Facebook, YouTube, LinkedIn, and Instagram. Press Resources Information about NIMH, research results, summaries of scientific meetings, and mental health resources. Email Updates Updates about mental health topics, including NIMH news, upcoming events, mental disorders, funding opportunities, and research. Innovation Speaker Series An annual lecture series dedicated to innovation, invention, and scientific discovery. Contact the Press Office 301-443-4536 NIMHpress@nih.gov About the Acting NIMH Director Learn more about the Acting Director of the NIMH, Shelli Avenevoli, Ph.D. Advisory Boards and Groups Read about the boards and groups that advise and provide guidance to the Institute. Strategic Plan The NIMH Strategic Plan for Research is a broad roadmap for the Institute’s research priorities over the next five years. Learn more about NIMH’s commitment to accelerating the pace of scientific progress and transforming mental health care. Offices and Divisions Learn more about the functions of each NIMH office and division. Budget Read the annual NIMH Congressional Justifications. Careers at NIMH Search for jobs, including scientific, administrative and executive careers at NIMH. Staff Directories Find the names, telephone numbers, email addresses, and office locations of NIMH staff. Getting to NIMH Find directions, maps, parking information, and other visitor information for NIMH. Quick Links Contribute to Mental Health Research Mobile navigation Mental Health Information Mental Health Information Home Health Topics Statistics Brochures and Fact Sheets Help for Mental Illnesses Clinical Trials Get Involved Get Involved Home Stakeholder Engagement Connect with NIMH Digital Shareables Science Education Upcoming Observances and Related Events Research Research Home Research Funded by NIMH Research Conducted at NIMH (Intramural Research Program) Funding Funding Home Opportunities & Announcements Strategy for Research Grants Grant Writing & Approval Process Managing Grants Clinical Research Research Training and Career Development Opportunities Small Business Research News & Events News & Events Home Science News Meetings and Events Multimedia Social Media Press Resources Email Updates Innovation Speaker Series About Us About Us Home About the Acting NIMH Director Advisory Boards and Groups Strategic Plan Offices and Divisions Budget Careers at NIMH Staff Directories Getting to NIMH Health Topics Statistics Brochures and Fact Sheets Help for Mental Illnesses Clinical Trials Home > Mental Health Information > Health Topics > Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder Share Page Menu What is ADHD? What are the signs and symptoms of ADHD? What are the risk factors of ADHD? How is ADHD treated? How can I find a clinical trial for ADHD? Where can I learn more about ADHD? Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder What is ADHD? Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is marked by an ongoing pattern of inattention and/or hyperactivity-impulsivity that interferes with functioning or development. People with ADHD experience an ongoing pattern of the following types of symptoms: Inattention means a person may have difficulty staying on task, sustaining focus, and staying organized, and these problems are not due to defiance or lack of comprehension. Hyperactivity means a person may seem to move about constantly, including in situations when it is not appropriate, or excessively fidgets, taps, or talks. In adults, hyperactivity may mean extreme restlessness or talking too much. Impulsivity means a person may act without thinking or have difficulty with self-control. Impulsivity could also include a desire for immediate rewards or the inability to delay gratification. An impulsive person may interrupt others or make important decisions without considering long-term consequences. What are the signs and symptoms of ADHD? Some people with ADHD mainly have symptoms of inattention. Others mostly have symptoms of hyperactivity-impulsivity. Some people have both types of symptoms.Many people experience some inattention, unfocused motor activity, and impulsivity, but for people with ADHD, these behaviors:Are more severeOccur more oftenInterfere with or reduce the quality of how they function socially, at school, or in a jobInattentionPeople with symptoms of inattention may often:Overlook or miss details and make seemingly careless mistakes in schoolwork, at work, or during other activitiesHave difficulty sustaining attention during play or tasks, such as conversations, lectures, or lengthy readingNot seem to listen when spoken to directlyFind it hard to follow through on instructions or finish schoolwork, chores, or duties in the workplace, or may start tasks but lose focus and get easily sidetrackedHave difficulty organizing tasks and activities, doing tasks in sequence, keeping materials and belongings in order, managing time, and meeting deadlinesAvoid tasks that require sustained mental effort, such as homework, or for teens and older adults, preparing reports, completing forms, or reviewing lengthy papersLose things necessary for tasks or activities, such as school supplies, pencils, books, tools, wallets, keys, paperwork, eyeglasses, and cell phonesBe easily distracted by unrelated thoughts or stimuliBe forgetful in daily activities, such as chores, errands, returning calls, and keeping appointmentsHyperactivity-impulsivityPeople with symptoms of hyperactivity-impulsivity may often:Fidget and squirm while seatedLeave their seats in situations when staying seated is expected, such as in the classroom or the officeRun, dash around, or climb at inappropriate times or, in teens and adults, often feel restlessBe unable to play or engage in hobbies quietlyBe constantly in motion or on the go, or act as if driven by a motorTalk excessivelyAnswer questions before they are fully asked, finish other people’s sentences, or speak without waiting for a turn in a conversationHave difficulty waiting one’s turnInterrupt or intrude on others, for example in conversations, games, or activitiesPrimary care providers sometimes diagnose and treat ADHD. They may also refer individuals to a mental health professional, such as a psychiatrist or clinical psychologist, who can do a thorough evaluation and make an ADHD diagnosis.For a person to receive a diagnosis of ADHD, the symptoms of inattention and/or hyperactivity-impulsivity must be chronic or long-lasting, impair the person’s functioning, and cause the person to fall behind typical development for their age. Stress, sleep disorders, anxiety, depression, and other physical conditions or illnesses can cause similar symptoms to those of ADHD. Therefore, a thorough evaluation is necessary to determine the cause of the symptoms.Most children with ADHD receive a diagnosis during the elementary school years. For an adolescent or adult to receive a diagnosis of ADHD, the symptoms need to have been present before age 12.ADHD symptoms can appear as early as between the ages of 3 and 6 and can continue through adolescence and adulthood. Symptoms of ADHD can be mistaken for emotional or disciplinary problems or missed entirely in children who primarily have symptoms of inattention, leading to a delay in diagnosis. Adults with undiagnosed ADHD may have a history of poor academic performance, problems at work, or difficult or failed relationships.ADHD symptoms can change over time as a person ages. In young children with ADHD, hyperactivity-impulsivity is the most predominant symptom. As a child reaches elementary school, the symptom of inattention may become more prominent and cause the child to struggle academically. In adolescence, hyperactivity seems to lessen and symptoms may more likely include feelings of restlessness or fidgeting, but inattention and impulsivity may remain. Many adolescents with ADHD also struggle with relationships and antisocial behaviors. Inattention, restlessness, and impulsivity tend to persist into adulthood. What are the risk factors of ADHD? Researchers are not sure what causes ADHD, although many studies suggest that genes play a large role. Like many other disorders, ADHD probably results from a combination of factors. In addition to genetics, researchers are looking at possible environmental factors that might raise the risk of developing ADHD and are studying how brain injuries, nutrition, and social environments might play a role in ADHD. ADHD is more common in males than females, and females with ADHD are more likely to primarily have inattention symptoms. People with ADHD often have other conditions, such as learning disabilities, anxiety disorder, conduct disorder, depression, and substance use disorder. How is ADHD treated? While there is no cure for ADHD, currently available treatments may reduce symptoms and improve functioning. Treatments include medication, psychotherapy, education or training, or a combination of treatments.MedicationFor many people, ADHD medications reduce hyperactivity and impulsivity and improve their ability to focus, work, and learn. Sometimes several different medications or dosages must be tried before finding the right one that works for a particular person. Anyone taking medications must be monitored closely by their prescribing doctor.Stimulants. The most common type of medication used for treating ADHD is called a “stimulant.” Although it may seem unusual to treat ADHD with a medication that is considered a stimulant, it works by increasing the brain chemicals dopamine and norepinephrine, which play essential roles in thinking and attention.Under medical supervision, stimulant medications are considered safe. However, like all medications, they can have side effects, especially when misused or taken in excess of the prescribed dose, and require an individual’s health care provider to monitor how they may be reacting to the medication.Non-stimulants. A few other ADHD medications are non-stimulants. These medications take longer to start working than stimulants, but can also improve focus, attention, and impulsivity in a person with ADHD. Doctors may prescribe a non-stimulant: when a person has bothersome side effects from stimulants, when a stimulant was not effective, or in combination with a stimulant to increase effectiveness.Although not approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) specifically for the treatment of ADHD, some antidepressants are used alone or in combination with a stimulant to treat ADHD. Antidepressants may help all of the symptoms of ADHD and can be prescribed if a patient has bothersome side effects from stimulants. Antidepressants can be helpful in combination with stimulants if a patient also has another condition, such as an anxiety disorder, depression, or another mood disorder. Non-stimulant ADHD medications and antidepressants may also have side effects.Doctors and patients can work together to find the best medication, dose, or medication combination. To find the latest information about medications, talk to a health care provider and visit the FDA website .Psychotherapy and psychosocial interventionsSeveral specific psychosocial interventions have been shown to help individuals with ADHD and their families manage symptoms and improve everyday functioning.For school-age children, frustration, blame, and anger may have built up within a family before a child is diagnosed. Parents and children may need specialized help to overcome negative feelings. Mental health professionals can educate parents about ADHD and how it affects a family. They also will help the child and his or her parents develop new skills, attitudes, and ways of relating to each other.All types of therapy for children and teens with ADHD require parents to play an active role. Psychotherapy that includes only individual treatment sessions with the child (without parent involvement) is not effective for managing ADHD symptoms and behavior. This type of treatment is more likely to be effective for treating symptoms of anxiety or depression that may occur along with ADHD.Behavioral therapy is a type of psychotherapy that aims to help a person change their behavior. It might involve practical assistance, such as help organizing tasks or completing schoolwork, or working through emotionally difficult events. Behavioral therapy also teaches a person how to:Monitor their own behaviorGive oneself praise or rewards for acting in a desired way, such as controlling anger or thinking before actingParents, teachers, and family members also can give feedback on certain behaviors and help establish clear rules, chore lists, and structured routines to help a person control their behavior. Therapists may also teach children social skills, such as how to wait their turn, share toys, ask for help, or respond to teasing. Learning to read facial expressions and the tone of voice in others, and how to respond appropriately can also be part of social skills training.Cognitive behavioral therapy helps a person learn how to be aware and accepting of one’s own thoughts and feelings to improve focus and concentration. The therapist also encourages the person with ADHD to adjust to the life changes that come with treatment, such as thinking before acting, or resisting the urge to take unnecessary risks.Family and marital therapy can help family members and spouses find productive ways to handle disruptive behaviors, encourage behavior changes, and improve interactions with the person with ADHD.Parenting skills training (behavioral parent management training) teaches parents skills for encouraging and rewarding positive behaviors in their children. Parents are taught to use a system of rewards and consequences to change a child’s behavior, to give immediate and positive feedback for behaviors they want to encourage, and to ignore or redirect behaviors they want to discourage.Specific behavioral classroom management interventions and/or academic accommodations for children and teens have been shown to be effective for managing symptoms and improving functioning at school and with peers. Interventions may include behavior management plans or teaching organizational or study skills. Accommodations may include preferential seating in the classroom, reduced classwork load, or extended time on tests and exams. The school may provide accommodations through what is called a 504 Plan or, for children who qualify for special education services, an Individualized Education Plan (IEP). To learn more about the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA), visit the U.S. Department of Education’s IDEA website .Stress management techniques can benefit parents of children with ADHD by increasing their ability to deal with frustration so that they can respond calmly to their child’s behavior.Support groups can help parents and families connect with others who have similar problems and concerns. Groups often meet regularly to share frustrations and successes, to exchange information about recommended specialists and strategies, and to talk with experts.The National Resource Center on ADHD, a program of Children and Adults with Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (CHADD®) supported by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), has information and many resources. You can reach this center online or by phone at 1-866-200-8098.Learn more about psychotherapy.Tips to help kids and adults with ADHD stay organizedFor kids:Parents and teachers can help kids with ADHD stay organized and follow directions with tools such as:Keeping a routine and a schedule. Keep the same routine every day, from wake-up time to bedtime. Include times for homework, outdoor play, and indoor activities. Keep the schedule on the refrigerator or a bulletin board. Write changes on the schedule as far in advance as possible.Organizing everyday items. Have a place for everything, (such as clothing, backpacks, and toys), and keep everything in its place.Using homework and notebook organizers. Use organizers for school material and supplies. Stress to your child the importance of writing down assignments and bringing home necessary books.Being clear and consistent. Children with ADHD need consistent rules they can understand and follow.Giving praise or rewards when rules are followed. Children with ADHD often receive and expect criticism. Look for good behavior and praise it.For adults:A professional counselor or therapist can help an adult with ADHD learn how to organize their life with tools such as:Keeping routines.Making lists for different tasks and activities.Using a calendar for scheduling events.Using reminder notes.Assigning a special place for keys, bills, and paperwork.Breaking down large tasks into more manageable, smaller steps so that completing each part of the task provides a sense of accomplishment. How can I find a clinical trial for ADHD? Clinical trials are research studies that look at new ways to prevent, detect, or treat diseases and conditions. The goal of clinical trials is to determine if a new test or treatment works and is safe. Although individuals may benefit from being part of a clinical trial, participants should be aware that the primary purpose of a clinical trial is to gain new scientific knowledge so that others may be better helped in the future.Researchers at NIMH and around the country conduct many studies with patients and healthy volunteers. We have new and better treatment options today because of what clinical trials uncovered years ago. Be part of tomorrow’s medical breakthroughs. Talk to your health care provider about clinical trials, their benefits and risks, and whether one is right for you.To learn more or find a study, visit:NIMH’s Clinical Trials webpage: Information about participating in clinical trialsClinicaltrials.gov: Current Studies on ADHD : List of clinical trials funded by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) being conducted across the countryJoin a Study: Children - ADHD: List of studies being conducted on the NIH Campus in Bethesda, MD Where can I learn more about ADHD? Free brochures and shareable resourcesAttention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder: What You Need to Know: This brochure provides information about attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) in children, teens, and adults including symptoms, how it is diagnosed, causes, treatment options, and resources to find help for yourself or your child.Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder in Adults: What You Need to Know: This brochure provides information about attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) in adults including symptoms, how ADHD is diagnosed, causes, treatment options, and resources to find help for yourself or someone else. Also available en español.Shareable Resources on ADHD: These digital resources, including graphics and messages, can be used to spread the word about ADHD and help promote awareness and education in your community.MultimediaMental Health Minute: ADHD: Take a mental health minute to learn about ADHD.NIMH Expert Discusses Managing ADHD: Learn the signs, symptoms, and treatments of ADHD as well as tips for helping children and adolescents manage ADHD during the pandemic.Federal resourcesADHD : CDC offers fact sheets, infographics, and other resources about the signs, symptoms, and treatment of children with ADHD.ADHD : (MedlinePlus – also available en español .)Research and statisticsJournal Articles : This webpage provides information on references and abstracts from MEDLINE/PubMed (National Library of Medicine).ADHD Statistics: This web page provides statistics about the prevalence and treatment of ADHD among children, adolescents, and adults.Last Reviewed: September 2023 Unless otherwise specified, the information on our website and in our publications is in the public domain and may be reused or copied without permission. However, you may not reuse or copy images. Please cite the National Institute of Mental Health as the source. Read our copyright policy to learn more about our guidelines for reusing NIMH content. Science News About Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) NIH Researchers Identify Brain Connections Associated With ADHD in Youth The Ups and Downs of Bipolar Disorder Developing Rapid, Accurate Assessment of Mental Disorders, Suicide Risk in Youth More Join A Study Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder Studies for Children Featured Publications About ADHD Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder: What You Need to Know This brochure provides information about attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) in children, teens, and adults including symptoms, how it is diagnosed, causes, treatment options, and resources to find help for yourself or your child. More Research Results Multimodal Treatment for ADHD (MTA) PubMed: Journal Articles about Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) NIMH Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and español Phone: 1-866-615-6464 Live Online Chat: Talk to a representative Email: nimhinfo@nih.gov Hours: 8:30 a.m. – 5 p.m. ET, M-FMail: National Institute of Mental Health Office of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications 6001 Executive Boulevard, MSC 9663 Bethesda, MD 20892-9663 Follow UsInstagram‌ Facebook Linkedin Twitter YouTube Subscribe to NIMH Email UpdatesType email address... NIMH ResourcesTopic Finder Brochures and Fact Sheets Contact Us Información en españolPolicies and NoticesPrivacy Policy Website Policies FOIA Accessibility HHS Vulnerability DisclosureFederal ResourcesNational Institutes of Health (NIH) NIH Virtual Tour U.S. Department of Health and Human Services USA.govThe National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of NIH, a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Top

--------------------------------------------------

